
Глава 1

Introduction

Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) first began to surface in discussions of the blockchain community around 2013, where people imagined them
as digital substitutes for traditional organizations. Technologists argued that
DAOs could automate many organizational processes and allow for more broadbased ownership and governance of the digital economy, all on the basis of a
cryptographically-secured blockchain [56, 172]. While such DAOs existed mostly
in the realm of speculation, with the noteworthy exception of The DAO [103],
the reality of DAOs has drastically changed over the past few years. Driven
by the surge of interest in crypto, real world deployment of DAOs surged by
as much as 660% from 2019 to late 2020 [133], rising to 1.6 million participants collectively managing 16 billion USD across over 13,000 DAOs in 2022
[194, 148, 1].
While there is no single comprehensive definition of DAOs, their core characteristics can be synthesized from various academic uses of the term: DAOs are
organizations governed by a smart contract, typically deployed on a blockchain
that autonomously enforces rules for interaction among the members [138].
DAOs also belong to a larger class of digitally-constituted organizations: organizations governed through computational artifacts such as software, hardware,
and/or protocols. For example, the Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Tor networks, even
though they are not DAOs, can be classified as digitally-constituted organizations.
This article provides an overview of the open problems and research questions
relevant to DAOs and related organizations, as well as a number of discrete
research and engineering projects across many disciplines. We cover not only
problems important to DAO practitioners but also opportunities to address
larger research questions through the lens of DAOs. Many of the problems
described here will also be relevant to anyone looking at governance issues within
online communities.

1.1

Who is this article written for?

This article is intended to (1) establish key problems and research opportunities
in DAOs, (2) communicate and motivate those problems and opportunities to
researchers not already familiar with DAOs, and (3) survey existing research
works and projects relevant to DAOs. We hope that our recommendations will
prove valuable to several different audiences.
Academics and researchers: Throughout this paper we identify many
problems that require conceptual and practical innovations, either within DAOs
or within an academic discipline.
DAO practitioners: Many of the problems identified in this paper were
sourced directly from our engagement with DAO practitioners, including workshops at Stanford, Harvard, Devcon, and Devconnect. We hope that in reading
this paper practitioners can identify areas of research relevant to their problems
and begin to think through the implications that existing research has for their
4

practice today.
Entrepreneurs: Many of the problems and questions highlighted throughout this document require the development of various services, tools, and solutions in order to be solved in the long run. Consequently, we believe that
this paper presents an interesting starting point for entrepreneurs looking to
contribute to the wider DAO ecosystem.
Investors: Given its growth and potential, the DAO ecosystem presents an
interesting area for investors. We believe that highlighting some of the most
pressing problems for DAOs today can serve as a useful indicator for allocating
impactful investments, be it to research or to support the concrete development
of tools and solutions in the space.

1.2

Call for collaboration

While this article is divided into disciplinary sections, many of the problems described require collaboration across multiple fields. For example, economic questions around the potential use of DAOs by unions will require input from lawyers
in employment law; analysis of DAOs as social computing systems should invoke
existing research within organizational science; a study of the cultural evolution
of DAOs likely requires significantly more development of off-chain data sets by
engineers; and so on. More generally, collaboration across fields is more likely to
produce impactful solutions that can handle the complexities of actual DAOs.
We particularly encourage empirical collaborations between academics and
builders in the DAO ecosystem. DAOs are not only organizations but constitute
a toolbox that one can work with—an empirical advantage that we encourage
researchers to take advantage of. And because so much of the DAO ecosystem
is being developed on the fly, it is often useful to work with someone aware of
current trends in the ecosystem.
To aid readers in finding collaborators, data sets, and other resources, we
have built a website to accompany this article at www.daoscience.org.

1.3

The bigger picture

As an organizational form, DAOs are closely related to earlier forms of online
community, especially open-source communities; many of the most successful
DAOs are also communities organized around an open-source product. But
DAOs also have antecedents in digital cooperatives and platform cooperatives
[238, 191], multi-organizational networks such as keiretsus [228, 168], crowdfunding platforms such as Patreon, the economies of virtual worlds such as World
of Warcraft and Second Life [176], and networked projects for peer production
such as Wikipedia that question the role of the traditional firm [33].
As a research subject, DAOs occupy an interesting and important intersection between the social sciences and the computer and engineering sciences. As
research subjects, DAOs are interesting because of the unique opportunities for
intervention afforded by smart contracts, the native availability of fine-grained

5

data, the vibrancy of the ecosystem, and a fast-moving do-ocratic culture inherited from tech and open-source. Compared to related fields such as platform
governance or civic tech, DAO science is more financially sophisticated, more
entrepreneurial, and less permissioned by existing institutions. Compared to
blockchain governance (with which it substantially overlaps), DAO science is
more experimental and human-centered. Compared to older studies of online
communities and virtual (game) worlds, DAO science requires significantly more
legal, economic, and organizational sophistication; in DAOs, the scope of activities is broader, and the stakes higher. And compared to the many studies
of information technology within management science, DAO science is more
keyed into questions of governance rather than operations: a digital organization may operate through tools like Slack, Salesforce, or Zendesk without
adjudicating rights and power through a digital mechanism; vice versa, a DAO
or digitally-constituted organization may govern incentives and roles within a
co-op or restaurant that uses very few digital technologies in its day-to-day
operations.1
Perhaps most importantly, the smart contracts and Ricardian contracts upon
which DAOs are based are truly general-purpose instruments. That means that
DAOs can express the full range of existing organizational forms—so the choice
is not between a corporation and a DAO per se but between a traditional,
legally-constituted corporation and a corporation that is digitally-constituted
through a smart contract. DAOs are not just curious instances of a certain
kind of online community; they have the expressive potential to transport a
tremendous amount of institutional infrastructure from the stonebound halls of
power onto the open internet; from law and economics into computer science.
DAOs in their current form may or may not become the future of organizations. However, it is already clear that online forms of organization are
becoming more and more important in the politics and economies of the world.
DAO science is one of the most promising paths forward for tackling and making
progress on hard questions of organization, coordination, and governance.

Глава 2

Computer science
Editor: Joshua Tan. Contributors: Joshua Tan, Michael Zargham,
Jake Hartnell, Benjamin Mako Hill, Dan Boneh, Tobin South, Ari
Juels, Eliza R. Oak.

Computer science historically grew out of applied mathematics, but over
the past few decades the field has also found remarkable success applying the
theory and practice of computation to the challenges of other disciplines such
as physics, biology, and economics. DAOs can be understood as a facet of this
“computational lens" [158, 281]: they allow us to convert many long-standing
1 This is not to say that governance and operations are not linked or correlated—DAOs are
still most likely to be used to govern digital artifacts like smart contracts or AI, not hamburger
joints—simply that they are not necessarily so.

6

social, organizational, and legal problems into computational ones, opening up
interesting new challenges for computer scientists, mathematicians, and engineers.
In this section, we will explore a number of different open problems and research opportunities in DAOs from the perspective of computer science, touching on subjects in cryptography and networking, which have traditionally been
the most salient aspects of computer science to blockchains, as well subjects
motivated from social computing, online governance, and human-computer interaction (HCI). Perhaps the most important cluster of research opportunities
revolves around building up the scientific foundations of research into DAOs,
including better benchmarks, data sets, validation criteria, smart contract taxonomies, and research-friendly DAO frameworks that, taken together, would
enable faster experimentation, more rigorous statistics, easier formal verification, and even the training of better AI models for organizations.

2.1

Granular privacy

Summary: Full transparency is often disadvantageous in strategic settings and
can be counterproductive in social settings when it reduces the incentives for participation. Cryptography can help define new, composable primitives for privacy
that allow DAOs and DAO participants to act strategically even while operating
on a public ledger.
Most current DAOs are public and transparent by default, built on pseudonymous and public blockchain protocols. However, there are various use-cases
where DAOs require some form of privacy. For example, ConstitutionDAO,
which participated in a widely-reported auction for the U.S. Constitution, was
affected by the fact that their treasury size was publicly-known, marking a distinct disadvantage for the DAO [214]. In general, revealing sensitive information
about a DAO or DAO participant’s strategies, preferences, or financial positions
can lead to manipulation, collusion, and other negative outcomes. Further, full
transparency can be socially problematic for many reasons [206], e.g. exposing
identifying information (even wallet addresses) may deter users from participating in DAOs due to concerns about privacy, security, and liability. On the other
hand, too much privacy can lead to co-optation by problematic actors—consider
the use of Tornado Cash by North Korean hackers, which provoked governmental responses and the eventual sanctioning of Tornado Cash [209]. More granular
privacy primitives enabled by advances in zero-knowledge (ZK) proofs, homomorphic encryption, and secure multiparty computation can solve many of these
problems:
• Private donations to a public treasury allows large, crowdfunded experiments like ConstitutionDAO to participate in auctions while retaining the
transparency of a public ledger. Properly executed, the donations would
be private before the auction and then become public at a later date.
• Private voting on public proposals allows the members of DAOs to participate in public governance without sharing public identifiers like wallet
7

addresses or the vote that they cast. This is especially useful for sensitive decisions like member compensation. Several platforms have already
begun implementing these features, though scalability and usability questions remain. Depending on its implementation though, private voting
may also destabilize the social fabric of a DAO or undermine the legitimacy of an organization’s decisions.
• Private proposals would allow DAOs to vote securely on proposals whose
content is private. These may be useful for sensitive decisions like a merger
or acquisition deal that the DAO does not want to make public.
• Private membership allows DAOs to operate like traditional private member organizations. This is useful for a variety of use-cases, for example in
sensitive security situations or for blinded peer review in scientific research.
• Private treasuries enable DAOs to hide the contents of their treasuries
as well as payments to and from those treasuries. Providing for privacy
around payments allows for a return to the norms that many businesses
and organizations expect. For example, many traditional companies shy
away from using DAO tooling as they do not want to allow competitors
to see their finances or their employees to see their compensation with
respect to their peers.
• Zero-knowledge complianceallows for DAOs to prove things about themselves without revealing confidential information. For example, proving
that no members or payments received are on an OFAC registry or proving the amount of taxable DAO income for a DAO registered as an LLC.
More granular privacy primitives could be especially helpful in squaring the
circle between the anonymity germane to public peer-to-peer networks and the
disclosure requirements of governments and regulators.

2.2

Private execution

Summary: Privacy concerns extend beyond DAO management into the realm
of DAO execution, where the actions of the DAO itself (usually through smartcontract execution) are public by default. This could be disadvantageous to some
organizations. While some tools for private execution of operations exist, more
work in computer science is needed to bridge between the status quo of public
DAO execution and the ability of organizations to selectively act discretely for
strategic reasons.
Beyond the scope of integrating privacy primitives into various aspects of
DAO management (treasuries, voting, membership), there is a broader issue
concerning the privacy of DAO execution. Most existing traditional organizations rely on the privacy of their internal operations to function effectively.
Broad operational privacy is crucial for defending against corporate espionage,

8

protecting the confidentiality of individuals and communities served by the organization, enabling surprise product releases, and defending against other vulnerabilities—issues that have been witnessed in DAOs as they have become
more sophisticated [203].
To fully realize their potential, DAOs must offer greater choice in execution
privacy while retaining their ‘autonomous’ character.
In general, this relies upon executing smart contracts privately, of which
there has been extensive work. In particular, private contract execution via new
chains has spawned both academic work (including theoretical analysis in [160]
and in-production public chains. These approaches draw on a wide variety of
technology primitives for privacy including secure multi-party computation (e.g.,
Enigma by Zyskind et al. [299], Eagle by Baum et al. [26], hardware enclaves
[75, 155, 284], and zero-knowledge SNARKS (e.g., Hawk by Kosba et al. [166],
[64], Bulletproofs by [54], zkay by [257], Zexe by [44], or via other schemes
such as including UTXO-based systems [44, 273] and incentivized agreement
of off-chain smart contract execution (e.g. Arbitrum, [154], if all parties are
honest). Other approaches using permissioned blockchains to add privacy to
smart contract execution [24, 48].
Many of these systems operate via a fully private on-chain environment,
especially those with the strongest privacy guarantees, and necessitate a shift
in DAO operations onto a secure chain. Some approaches piggyback and interoperate with existing popular chains, however these privacy solutions are
incomplete. For example, zkay and Zether go some way towards addressing this
interoperability challenge with Ethereum, but their privacy guarantees are limited to payments (Zether) or specific private values (zkay). At the very least,
most interoperable solutions with public chains always leak activity metadata
on what contracts are executing.
Hybrid models, which exchange metadata been private and public execution
at a minimum, are possible but need to be integrated with existing DAO tooling
and undergo more battle testing and security analysis.
While these technical goals are worth striving for, it exists in tension with
the principles of openness set forward by the DAO community. The public
nature of DAO execution drives transparency and accountability, a key feature
in building competitive advantages based on trust, and considered to many a
core ethical advantage. Further, the existence of privately executing DAOs can
lead to malicious phenomena such as Dark DAOs [91] where a decentralized
cartel buys on-chain votes opaquely. Are the benefits of normalizing private
DAO usage worth the risks of coordinated large-scale bribery?
While the use of privacy over transparency is not always an ethical cost (such
as if privacy enables the protection of vulnerable people), the tension between
the existing bias of the traditional business world toward public secrecy and the
values of open communities should be examined further, perhaps facilitating the
building new models of hybrid transparency enabled through DAOs.
By combining inherently private offline activities with secure DAO operations, the future of DAOs could offer valuable granular privacy choices. This
would enable a variety of strategic options that would be unfeasible or disadvan9

tageous in a fully public setting. Ongoing development, testing, and deployment
of these tools are necessary as the DAO ecosystem continues to grow.

2.3

New computational substrates

Summary: DAOs and digitally-constituted organizations are built on top of computational substrates such as blockchains. Computer networking, cryptography,
and distributed computing can help improve the properties of these substrates,
help them interoperate with each other, and even define entirely new substrates.
Computer science is the material science of digital space. Just as new materials allow us to build taller buildings and longer bridges, new computational primitives allow us to build more accessible spaces, more scalable platforms, and more
effective digital organizations. For example, scaling challenges in blockchains
have led to new technological developments such as optimistic rollups and zeroknowledge rollups that enable blockchains to securely delegate computation to
off-chain substrates, typically a “layer 2" blockchain. This idea of delegating
computation across different computational substrates highlights several open
research questions for DAOs:
1. How do we build secure and effective multichain DAOs? Substantial work
on cross-chain communication protocols [169, 285], cryptographically-secure
bridges [31, 288], and atomic swaps [196] highlights the way in which there
is a growing universe of “ledgers of record". DAOs increasingly operate
and manage assets across multiple chains, and they need a secure way of
owning and governing themselves across multiple chains.
2. How do we build secure and effective multi-substrate DAOs, i.e. DAOs
whose organizational logic is executed across multiple different computational substrates, e.g. within two blockchains with substantially different properties, within a blockchain and a distributed network such as
Holochain [136]?
3. How do we securely and efficiently interoperate between DAOs and the rest
of the internet? While DAOs are commonly associated with the smart contract infrastructure of certain blockchains,2 many DAOs already delegate
substantial parts of their organizational logic and compute to traditional,
off-chain services such as Discord and Discourse as well as decentralized
storage services such as IPFS. Substantial research and development has
been done on off-chain oracles [10] as well as various ways of presenting
block transactions through subgraphs, but many open questions remain
about the architecture (client-server, peer-to-peer, n-tier, etc.) and governance of these off-chain services—which relates to the design of general
internet services and applications.
2 The “decentralized" and “autonomous" in “DAO" are typically predicated on the guarantees of cryptographic consensus within a widely-distributed peer-to-peer network.

10

4. What kind of computational substrate is sufficient for DAOs? For example, is it possible to build minimally-viable DAOs on other sorts of
peer-to-peer networks beyond the blockchain, or within the internet protocol stack itself? Such a project seems possible: after all, the first usage
of the term “DAO" was part of a proposal for a wireless home network
[138].
5. What kind of computational substrate is optimal for DAOs? If a blockchain
with a smart contract architecture is optimal, what kind of blockchain and
what kind of architecture best supports the use-cases of DAOs?
In general, any research that increases the speed, reduces the cost of onchain storage and compute, or makes smart contract architectures more robust
to attack will expand the practical design space of DAOs.

2.4

Secure voting

Summary: Many forms of DAO governance depend on secure and trustworthy
voting mechanisms. New research in computer science, especially cryptography,
can help DAOs implement voting mechanisms that is more secure along several different dimensions, including integrity, public verifiability, privacy, and
coercion-resistance.
The process of voting on proposals is central to the governance of DAOs.
Voting raises many design decisions, such as how to allocate voting power and
how voting choices should translate into outcomes. These decisions relate to
questions of social choice and tokenomics discussed in this paper. Once a DAO
chooses to adopt a desired mechanism for voting, the question arises of how to
implement it, and in particular how to do so securely.
DAO voting differs from conventional voting in political elections in several
key ways. First, it is entirely digital. Users do not need to visit polling stations
or interact physically with ballots. Second, it is typically pseudonymous: Voters
identify themselves by on-chain addresses, rather than real-world identities, as
in conventional elections. Finally, while most political elections permit only
one vote per eligible voter, DAO voting often weights votes according to token
holdings. DAO voting bears some similarity in this sense to corporate proxy
voting.
There is a well-established literature on what is often called verifiable voting
(see, e.g., [32, 74, 234]). While this literature is often concerned with conventional voting, it nonetheless outlines a number of cryptographic concepts and
tools relevant to DAO voting. Especially important is an articulation of the desirable security properties for voting systems. These properties vary somewhat
across the literature. Informally, though, they typically include:
• Integrity: Each voter should be able to cast only a single ballot and the
choice(s) made by a voter on that ballot should be reflected correctly in
the outcome of a vote.

11

• Public verifiability: Anyone should be able to verify (cryptographically)
the integrity of a vote.
• Privacy: No entity, including those tasked with tallying election results,
should learn anything about an election other than the outcome. (Privacy
in this sense is a special case of private execution, discussed above.)
• Coercion-resistance: Voters should be unable to prove to anyone how they
voted. As a result, coercion—which encompasses voter bribery, i.e., votebuying, as well as voter intimidation—should be infeasible [81, 153].
Today, the main focus of DAO voting systems has been on integrity—the
only one of these properties that is truly indispensable for trustworthy governance—and to some extent on public verifiability. Privacy has been a growing
concern, however. For instance, Snapshot, the most popular voting system for
DAOs, recently incorporated support for ballot privacy—although it lasts only
for the duration of the ballot-casting period [2]. The properties of privacy and
integrity are in fact in fundamental tension. For example, one way to achieve
public verifiability is to publish all ballots and their tally on chain, but this approach would undermine ballot privacy. Simultaneously achieving integrity and
privacy is one of the main focuses of the verifiable-voting literature. Translating results from that literature to the setting of DAOs is an open problem—as
is, more generally, a practical realization of the full set of four voting security
properties.
Coercion-resistance is an especially tricky property to enforce. Recognizing
the risk it poses in blockchain systems to DAOs and even to staking systems, researchers have considered a range of various countermeasures, such as Buterin’s
Minimum Anti-Collusion Infrastructure (MACI) [57].
Unfortunately, blockchains aren’t just an attractive platform for implementing voting schemes, but also for attacking them through orchestrated coercion
or vote-buying. This is the idea behind what is called a Dark DAO [91], a
decentralized vote-buying system that uses a secure enclave to conceal the identities of its participants. While not yet deployed in the wild, Dark DAOs are
nonetheless a practical threat, realizable today using enclave-based blockchains
such as Oasis and capable of attacking DAOs on other chains such as Ethereum
[21]. Dark DAOs break MACI and other vote-buying prevention schemes.
Effective countermeasures to Dark DAOs—and, in general, practical ways
of achieving coercion-resistance in DAO voting—are a critical open subproblem
within the larger challenge of realizing secure voting systems for DAOs [159].

2.5

Modeling and formal verification for governance

Summary: There are many modes of failure within DAOs and many ways in
which they might achieve undesirable outcomes. It is hard—but not impossible,
given the computational nature of DAOs—to define conditions that provably or
statistically constrain such failures. Computer science can help define conditions

12

and build mathematical models for DAOs that produce formal and statistical
guarantees about DAOs’ behavior.
Existing research within social choice theory and computational social choice
gives conditions and limitations on the performance of voting and preference aggregation systems, most famously Arrow’s impossibility theorem. While results
from social choice and its variants are certainly relevant to DAOs, the organizational logic embedded within a DAO usually extends far beyond the exact
voting mechanism. This broadness makes them susceptible to a wide range of
other attacks, exploits, and failures beyond those salient in social choice (e.g.
51% attacks, sybil attacks, free-riding on governance, lack of engagement), but
it also sits them downstream of a number of potential improvements.
Formal verification involves the use of mathematical methods to prove the
correctness of the implementations of algorithms. Since the hack of The DAO,
substantial work has been done to verify the functional correctness and security
of smart contracts using formal methods [38, 201], complementing a strong
tradition of industry-driven security audits for smart contracts.
There are existing efforts in game theory and computer science to build
computer-aided design (CAD) tools for governance [117, 124], i.e. a modeling
language that captures the basic primitives and incentives necessary to design
and analyze governance systems. These languages already have applications to
contract theory (the economic analysis of legal contracts) and to smart contracts,
and could be directly extended to the smart contracts that constitute DAOs.
While agent-based models do not typically produce formal guarantees, they
are often quite valuable for exploring and drawing insights into a complex system [8]. Agent-based models can provide a useful framework for simulating
and understanding the dynamics of DAOs, allowing researchers to test various
configurations and observe their impact on system behavior [276].
Reachability analysis, a concept borrowed from robotics [14, 292], can be
applied to DAOs to determine the feasibility of achieving certain states through
unknown sequences of actions. This approach involves defining a "governance
surface" analogous to a control surface, which can be used to identify possible
outcomes and transitions within the DAO’s governance process. By understanding the reachability of different states, we can better evaluate the robustness and
adaptability of a DAO’s governance structure [290].
Additionally, computer-aided design methodologies, particularly model-based
systems engineering (MBSE) for complex systems [101], can provide valuable
insights into the design and management of DAOs. MBSE focuses on creating,
analyzing, and managing complex systems using models, which can help in addressing the unique challenges posed by DAOs. In the context of DAOs, it is
crucial to distinguish between verification and validation, as they determine the
effectiveness of a software system deployed to administrate a governance process
within the DAO. Verification ensures that the system meets its specifications,
while validation ensures that it fulfills its intended purpose in the real-world
context [70]. The extent to which a particular set of governance algorithms
entrenched as smart contract logic is suitable for the context in which they
deployed is a question of validation, rather than verification [189].
13

In conclusion, the interdisciplinary nature of DAOs opens up opportunities
for integrating various computer science concepts and methodologies to analyze and improve their governance structures. By leveraging formal verification,
reachability analysis, agent-based models, and computer-aided design methodologies, we can build a more robust understanding of DAOs and develop more
secure, efficient, and resilient governance systems.

2.6

Human-computer interaction for DAO interfaces

Summary: DAOs have a usability problem. Human-computer interaction can
help design better interfaces and systems through which members and stakeholders organize their decentralized communities.
Human-computer interaction (HCI) is a subfield of computer science that
focuses on the design, implementation, and evaluation of interactive computing
systems. In particular, HCI tends to focus on the interfaces and processes
through which humans interact with computers and digital systems, as opposed
to the internal workings of those systems. Many innovative features of online
platforms are first incubated as research projects within the field of HCI [99],
e.g. within content moderation [110]. While HCI researchers have contemplated
and sometimes approached the design questions of blockchain applications [105],
they have rarely worked on topics specific to DAOs. There are a number of
dimensions within which HCI can contribute to DAOs:
• Promoting usability. Right now, the learning curve to enter a DAO is extremely steep, ruling out use by users with more diverse backgrounds and
abilities. Further, the rigid, irreversible nature of smart contracts makes
many interactions prohibitively risky for users without a significant financial cushion. HCI can inform the design of inclusive systems that cater
to varying levels of expertise, language, and accessibility needs, ensuring
that DAOs are available to a wider audience.
• Bring rigorous methodology into the design process for DAOs. There is a
need for more consistent design methodology in this space. For example,
while many projects have built dashboards and visualizations for DAOs, a
rigorous, HCI-driven evaluation process can help iterate and refine these
systems.
• Testing specific design interventions. A key component of DAOs is to
engage participants in governance. While the industry has so far been
drawn to cryptoeconomic systems that incentivize participation such as
Paladin, design interventions that focus on better interfaces for eliciting
and aggregating preferences may be less costly and more effective. HCI is
particularly well-suited for evaluating the cognitive and social factors that
influence group decision-making in DAOs.
• Exploring bots and technical interventions within DAOs. Many DAOs
make use of bots and automated tools within their communication platforms. These bots facilitate not only blockchain-enabled features such as
14

token-gating but also various forms of governance decision-making. Various studies could explore this dynamic, for example calculating a DAO’s
“sense of virtual community" [162] and then measuring how bots affect
that metric.

2.7

DAOs as social computing systems

Summary: DAOs, as novel forms of digital organization, are germane to many
core questions in social computing, an interdisciplinary subfield of computer science. Social computing can help provide a design framework for DAOs and contextualize them within a wide range of digital institutions including open-source
software, reputation systems, online auctions, and crowdfunding platforms.
Social computing is a subfield of computer science that studies the interplay
between people, technology, and society. As a highly interdisciplinary field,
many research questions motivated by social computing overlap with those motivated from political science, sociology, and economics—e.g. how do we understand, model, and visualize the behavior of DAOs, what is novel and not
novel about them, how does this particular digital infrastructure change the
way that people behave? Unlike social science, social computing research tends
to center computing technology as the primary object of study. Although social
computing is closely related to HCI, it seeks to understand or design computing systems for social groups and social behavior while HCI research typically
focuses on individual users. In this sense, DAOs are classic examples of social
computing systems.
Despite clear affinities, there has been relatively little work in social computing on DAOs. DAOs have been discussed as promising sites for future research
in social computing work on governance [118] and some early work has treated
DAOs as objects of study [18, 185]. Social computing can potentially offer a
unique and important perspective on DAOs, one that situates DAOs within the
larger context of socio-technical systems and emphasizes the role of technology
in shaping social processes. Social computing is also often more experimental
and interventionist than traditional social science, which matches well with the
open and permissionless character of DAOs. Some potential research questions
include:
• How do specific technological design choices in the context or affordances
shape social behavior or social interaction within a DAO? How will specific
technological choices made by the creators of DAOs allow, encourage,
discourage, or foreclose certain types of behaviors and outcomes?
• How does social structure (e.g., roles, power structure, norms, expectations about technology, and so on) shape the way that a particular technology is understood or used? For example, how might technically-similar
smart contracts ground different communities in very different ways?
• How can we design DAO technology to support certain types of social
behaviors or outcomes and to prevent others?
15

2.8

Measures of decentralization

Summary: Research on standardized metrics and definitions of decentralization
is ongoing, with approaches ranging from entropy-based indices, SoKs, or empirical analyses of voting concentration. Broader questions about the current
state, value, and structures of decentralized systems continue to be explored.
Research on how to measure DAO decentralization is still emerging, but
various works have explored this topic. [114] examine the Gini and Nakamoto
indices, participation rates, and the monetary aspects of governance. [247]
delve into different entropy concepts and introduce graph-centric decentralization measures. Wright presents a classification system comparing DAOs with
other autonomous entities [287]. [264] analyze voting blocs in MakerDAO, using clustering to identify them. Additionally, [21] introduce a new, DAO-specific
metric called voting-bloc entropy (VBE), merging traditional entropy measures
with voting-bloc identification. Another noteworthy concept is "credible neutrality," a community benchmark mentioned in sources like [58, 61].
Moreover, various systematizations of knowledge (SoKs) have sought to assess the landscape as well as propose new measures. [294] note the need for the
blockchain community to converge on a standardized definition or metric for decentralization. In their SoK, they first create a taxonomy based on consensus,
network, governance, wealth, and transactions. Building on this taxonomy, they
apply Shannon entropy to propose a decentralization index for blockchain transactions which they then apply empirically in the context of DeFi token transfers
to document that DEXs and DeFi lending protocols appear slightly more decentralized than payment and derivative apps. They also find that EIP-1559
[62], which modified Ethereum’s transaction fees, increases decentralization.
[157] also present an SoK on the topic of blockchain decentralization, this
time taking a stratified approach by first dissecting blockchain systems into
multiple strata (hardware; software; network; consensus; economics; API; governance; and geography). They also introduce the “Minimum Decentralization
Test” as an approach to assessing decentralization.
Finally, another approach to measuring decentralization might focus specifically on governance participation, which [193] do by examining decentralized
voting to amend DeFi smart contracts. Focusing on decentralized lending protocol Compound, they find a striking concentration of power, with ten voters
holding nearly 60% of voting power.
In addition to these efforts to develop a systematic measure of decentralization, defining decentralization touches on other fruitful research questions,
including:
• What is the current landscape of decentralization?
• Why/ when is decentralization valuable?
• To what extent do the unique aspects of web3/ decentralization help or
hurt with the challenges of online interactions?

16

• How do we incorporate the role of foundations and other groups of actors
into our measure of decentralization?
One possible angle for mapping the motivations for decentralization could
differentiate between the economic; regulatory; technical engineering; and ideological motivations.

2.9

Democratic infrastructures for governing technology

Summary: DAOs are practical examples of an approach to governing technology
that foregrounds the role of technology and local communities instead of traditional modalities of regulation. Computer science can help us understand and
improve these approaches to the governance of technology.
The governance of technology and algorithms is more often approached
through an institutional or legal lens than a computational one. Studies of
past examples tend to foreground regulatory mechanisms such as the law and
institutions; for example, research on the governance of internet protocols tends
to focus on technical standards bodies such as the IETF or elite forums such as
the IGF, assuming that control over the internet protocol was out of the reach
of ordinary users [97]. More recent work has highlighted ways to involve ordinary users in the design and governance of digital technologies such as machine
learning algorithms [253], but these efforts have not scaled to more widespread
use. DAOs are on the forefront of these more community-oriented approaches
to the governance of technology. However, DAOs are also quite limited insofar
as the technologies they govern are usually protocols and contracts deployed on
a blockchain. How can DAOs or related social technologies govern technologies
such as websites and domain names, server infrastructure, telecommunications
protocols, and even pre-trained AI models—none of which are not implemented
in a Web3 context? Perhaps sensitive algorithms in content moderation or
policing could be content-addressed, creating the means through which affected
parties could participate in algorithmic oversight.

2.10

Data sets and data standards

Summary: DAOs, despite their public nature, are still difficult to study due to
lack of standardization, reliance on off-chain services and APIs, and other challenges with data indexing and integration. Computer science can help define
data sets, schemas, and taxonomies that would enable easier data collection,
faster experimentation, more consistent statistical tests, easier formal verification, and even the training of better AI models.
DAOs are nominally fully public and transparent, but there are many questions that researchers might like to ask which cannot be readily answered given
the current data infrastructure of DAOs. For example:
• How many DAOs exist on a given blockchain at any moment?
• Who are the actual members of a DAO?
17

• What is the contract space of a DAO, i.e. all the on-chain contracts and
multisigs controlled by or associated with a DAO?
• What is the level of engagement of members over time?
• What is the legal status of a DAO, if any?
• What is the organizational structure of a DAO, e.g. in terms of subDAOs?
• What is the spread of different voting schemes across all DAOs?
• What kinds of activities does a DAO engage in?
• What rights are afforded to the members of a DAO? Which rights are
code- versus rule-enforced?
Again, the issue in these cases is not that the information is private and must
be negotiated for (as with typical Web2 platforms) or that the precise definition
of a metric is being contested (e.g. of decentralization). Most data relevant
to DAOs is publicly-accessible, but interpreting, integrating, and organizing
that data is hard. Some of these issues arise from lack of on- and off-chain
standardization across DAOs and DAO frameworks, which is being addressed
by nascent efforts in the ecosystem to develop standard schemas and taxonomies
[5, 268]. Others arise because engaging with a DAO involves interacting with
many off-chain platforms, and these platforms either do not report data or do
not integrate with early standards efforts. And while some data sets have been
built for DAO smart contracts [164], DAO constitutions [267], and political
sentiment [165], other data sets simply still need to be built.
Despite the present lack of data infrastructure, DAOs present a unique opportunity to build “live" data sets, whether through public subgraphs and other
automated mechanisms, through technical standards implemented by DAO frameworks and other service providers, or through institutional designs that incentivize reporting on a DAO-to-DAO basis. Having access to such live data is
not only a boon to scientific analysis; it is also an important basis for providing
real-time feedback to DAOs, drastically reducing the timeline for research to
impact the real world. DAOs themselves could substantially benefit from access
to such data, whether for operational, reporting, or governance purposes.

2.11

Automated testing and automated experimentation

Summary: DAOs do not have a rigorous testing framework or any infrastructure
for experimentation such as which exists in psychology, medicine, or AI. Computer science can help supply the protocols and libraries for automated testing
and automated experimentation.
While most experimentation with DAOs currently takes place outside of academic settings, various quality-of-life improvements to tooling and infrastructure could make it much easier for researchers (and ordinary users) to develop,
deploy, and test DAOs.
18

Automated testing of DAOs could be especially helpful. While there exist platforms for smart contract testing such as Tenderly, none are currently
specialized to DAOs. Automated tests or benchmarks could be constructed to
query a given DAO’s:
• susceptibility to the loss or inattention of key participants or administrators [215],
• resilience to 51% attacks,
• speed and responsiveness to crises,
• ability to handle disagreements,
• susceptibility to forking,
• and likely responses to various adverse financial or technical events.
Such tests and benchmarks follow a rich tradition of testing and quality
assurance within software engineering and could be used to validate a DAO’s
fitness for purpose. Further tests could be devised that could be structured as
challenges or games that a living DAO could run through, akin to fire drills,
war games, and other tests of capacity.
Another approach to automated experimentation involves working directly
with the many already-extant DAO frameworks. A governance framework for
DAOs, or just DAO framework, is a smart contract template or set of such
templates that can be used to deploy a DAO on a blockchain, typically with
an associated management interface. Many of these frameworks are moving
toward specialized use-cases, e.g. Safe’s focus on multisig management compared to Aragon’s focus on permissions infrastructure. A modular, open-ended
plugin or library that can abstract over these DAO frameworks and connect
them to rigorous testing tools—comparable to how libraries like scikit-learn or
TensorFlow drastically reduce the hassle of building and testing new learning
algorithms in AI—could be extremely useful.
Ultimately, the elements above could be synthesized into an experimental platform for DAOs and DAO frameworks. For example, software such as
Dallinger [262], Pushkin [137], and Experiment Factory [254] automate significant parts of the process for producing classes of psychology experiments
via automated statistical design, a domain-specific language for experimental
setup, and simple Mechanical Turk and TaskRabbit integrations. They allow a researcher to build and run a psychology experiment in a matter of
hours—something that would have taken them months to plan and run previously—and to run “massive" versions of traditional experiments that were
previously impossible. A similar platform for testing governance experiments,
including distinct modules for voting, reputation, and privacy as well as integrations for on-chain deployment and data tracking, could vastly accelerate
experimentation as well as data collection and synthesis.

19

Глава 3

Economics
Editors: Jason Potts, Chris Berg, Sarah Hubbard. Contributors:
Jeff Strnad, Sarah Hubbard, Jason Potts, Chris Berg, Divya Siddarth, Sarah Horowitz, Michael Zargham.

Economists who have sought to study blockchains have developed a number of distinct approaches. These include: (1) cryptoeconomics (game theory
and mechanism design applied to incentive problems in protocol design, also
known as tokenomics); (2) microeconomics, including finance, industrial organization, and public goods, typically using some formulation of Chicago price
theory, Berkeley competition theory, and Harvard/MIT welfare economics (e.g.
Abadi and Brunnermeier 2018 [7], Cong and He 2019 [86], Buterin et al 2019
[63], Catilini and Gans 2020 [69]), and (3) institutional cryptoeconomics, which
draws on new institutional economics, public choice theory and Austrian economics (e.g. Davidson et al 2018 [92], Berg et al 2019 [35]. There is also a
distinct school of crypto monetary economics (e.g. George Selgin [244], Larry
White [280], William Luther, et al [186]). There is overlap between these mostly
complementary approaches, and it is useful to understand these as examining
broadly different parts of the crypto-economy at different levels of focus and
with somewhat different tools. Nevertheless, the common core is analysis of
the crypto-economy through the lens of rational behavior subject to incentives,
which are designed mechanisms in which blockchain technologies (including
smart contracts) are new technologies that lower specific costs. The purpose of
analysis is to trace these changes in costs, through changes in markets, through
to new equilibrium outcomes.
The economic approach to DAOs is a new field that sits within the standard
economic approach to the theory of the firm as developed by leading economists
such as Ronald Coase, Oliver Williamson, Armen Alchian and Harold Demsetz, Jensen and Meckling, and Oliver Hart. In 1939, Ronald Coase asked ‘why
do firms exist?" and then answered that they were an organizational technology that economized on the transaction costs of using the market [82]. This
‘transaction cost’ perspective is the foundation of New Institutional Economics.
William and Hart developed this approach further by examining issues of trust
and opportunism, and the economic logic of contracting. Jensen and Meckling
developed a theory of the firm as a ‘nexus of contracts’ and Alchian and Demsetz developed a model of a firm as a ‘private market’. These approaches sought
to understand the existence of firms, as well as their comparative advantages
as technologies for coordinating people and capital, through the lens of efficient
contracting over situations that involved missing information and uncertainty
(i.e. asymmetric information, hazards of opportunism and problems of trust).
A small but growing literature seeks to develop economic analyses of DAOs.
Lumineau et al. [184] and Santana and Albareda [235] offer useful recent surveys. This literature largely overlaps with the theory of the firm and therefore
includes topics such as: agency, contracting, entrepreneurship, investment under
uncertainty, team production, asset specificity, boundaries of the firm, and cor20

porate governance. However, the economics of DAOs also sits within a broader
literature on voluntary or private organizations, integrating the economic theory of clubs and the economic theory of commons [231]. Clubs and commons
theory is also focused on governance and collective decision-making, as well as
the creation and use of common pool resources or local public goods.

3.1

Institutional economics

Summary: Part of the rationale for DAOs is that they are a technology, much
like firms, for minimizing transaction costs and ‘costs of trust’. Institutional
economics can help explain present DAO structures and suggest new designs for
DAOs based on a rigorous analysis of the DAO’s cost functions.
Why do DAOs exist? This is the same question that Ronald Coase asked in
1939 that established the concept of transaction cost and the field of New Institutional Economics as a comparative analysis of institutions. Coase’s answer
was that firms exist to minimize the ‘transaction cost’ of using a market. These
transaction costs are the costs of searching for counterparties, writing contracts,
monitoring actions, haggling and bargaining and so on. They include search and
information costs, agency and monitoring costs, contracting and decision costs;
to a considerable extent they are ‘costs of trust’ that would not exist in a world
of perfect costless information with total transparency in a world of counterparties who only ever told the truth and always did what they promised. Such
a world would lack uncertainty and opportunism. Firms are a technology for
organizing people and resources into coordinated actions. Firms exist when it
is cheaper to use that technology than an alternative institutional technology,
namely the market. Firms exist because they economize on the costs of using
the market. The particular boundaries of firms (e.g. vertically integrated, multidivisional, cooperative, etc) are competitive consequences of those cost-specific
cost advantages over a range of margins. The same logic applies to the economic
analysis of DAOs.
A DAO is an organization made in part using a new technology: smart contracts. These give DAOs different competitive advantages in relation to transparency, monitoring and auditing, as well assurance and expectation. As such,
DAOs have different cost functions with respect to a range of key operational
and competitive functions within economic coordination, e.g. some have argued
that DAOs exist to economize on the costs of trust compared to firms and markets [35]. Note that not all costs are significantly lower. On some dimensions
such as regulatory uncertainty and integration with legal and other external
systems, DAOs are often more costly than traditional industrial corporations.
In other words, DAOs are institutional competitors to other forms of economic
organization (also including clubs, coops, trusts, governments, as well as firms
and markets).
The problem, then, is to develop a general economic theory of DAOs that
(1) explains their existence in terms of specific costs and the way in which those
costs are internalized, (2) grounds those costs in the logic and design of (smart)
contracts and other resources within the DAO, and (3) links those resources to
21

a theory of DAO strategy (see “Dynamics and strategy", below). Within this
general framing, we can then organize a range of open questions:
• Structure of a DAO. Analogous to the theory of the organizational
structure of a firm (pioneered by Alfred Chandler [73], and the U-form and
M-form corporation), what is the governing economic logic determining
the structure of DAOs and subDAOs?
• Information economics of DAO coordination. The economic efficiency of firms and markets (and governments) is in part based on their
comparative efficiency in different types of information processing, e.g.
in price signals in markets or entrepreneurial coordination (in the work
of F.A. Hayek [140], Mark Casson [68, 67], Israel Kirzner [161], George
Stigler. An open question is to empirically and theoretically analyze the
economic mechanisms and economic efficiency of information flow and processing in a DAO, including through new data sets not present in a typical
firm.
• Entrepreneurship versus management. Firms are both effective organizational mechanisms for starting and building new projects and engaging in entrepreneurship (e.g. entrepreneurial capitalism, viz. Schumpueter
[239], Kirzner [161]), as well as efficient mechanisms for operating large
going concerns e.g. managerial capitalism, viz. Porter, Bloom and van
Reenan). Do DAOs share this joint comparative efficiency, or are they better for starting new projects due to low costs of organizing (entrepreneurship) or for operating existing projects due to low costs of participation
in cooperative joint ownership (management)? This is both an empirical
and theoretical research question.
• Management and incentives in DAOs. What incentive structures
(tokenized or otherwise) are evident across DAOs that can be designed
and used for effective DAO management?
– How can tendencies towards speculation be identified and minimized
mechanistically? What are the impacts of financialized governance
on efficacy, ability to fundraise, and internal execution processes?
How should token distributions be structured?
– How should incentives be created to get work done from contributors?
What is an effective compensation structure for aligning delegate
incentives?
– How to define and create effective bounties? (Note this issue relates
broadly to incentivising community production of local public goods)
• DAO constitutions. Public choice theory and constitutional economics
makes specific predictions about the economic efficiency of different types
of constitutions [40, 51](Black 1948, Buchanan and Tullock 1962 [52],
Buchanan 1990 [51]). Early data on DAO constitutions suggest a very
22

different form for DAO constitutions, which are designed to complement
existing smart contracts [267]. What are the economic principles of DAO
constitutions? Does the efficiency principle of supermajority or unanimity
hold in internalizing externalities?
• Mapping rules for DAOs. Where corporate firms use hierarchical
decision-making, DAOs tend to be flatter and egalitarian, like a commons
[210]. A large-scale empirical and theoretical research question is to map
the governance rules of all DAOs, e.g. through some form of institutional
grammar [88, 116] or building earlier work on capturing data sets of DAO
smart contracts [164].
• Cultural and institutional economics of DAOs. A significant literature in development economics focuses on the role of culture in shaping
institutional evolution and economic outcomes (e.g. Grube and Storr [131]
2015, Storr [260], Chamlee-Wright 2002, 2008 [71, 72]). This literature can
be usefully re-applied to the study of DAO communities and ecologies.
• Externalities and social welfare. What are ‘market failure’ equivalents for DAOs, and what types of goods can be provided by different
actors within a given DAO’s ecosystem? How can public goods funding
mechanisms piloted in DAOs (e.g. see Gitcoin’s quadratic funding rounds)
extend existing economic theory, particularly in maximizing positive-sum
returns to semi-private, anti-rival goods? How do DAOs bound their club
goods? What digital property rights should be enforceable? What public
“bads" can be reduced by DAOs?
• Infrastructure and public goods. Due to the relatively low cost of distributed ownership and participation, DAOs have characteristics of clubs,
and are therefore effective institutional mechanisms for the private provision of local public goods or quasi-public infrastructure, applying to both
the private individual and private collections. Such goods can be provisioned by sub-committees within a DAO or by a trust or foundation under
DAO oversight [220]. A major open question in this arena concerns the
design and analysis of incentive mechanisms to provide different types of
local public goods, e.g. taxes, bounties, grants, prizes, retroactive funding,
and so on [63].

3.2

Case studies within institutional economics

Summary: Economists do not currently have a good way of measuring and quantifying the transaction and governance costs of DAOs. To make progress on this
problem, we can build on top of particular case studies that compare DAOs with
comparable firm or market forms of coordination.
The overarching research project in the institutional economics of DAOs is
to map, quantify, and analyze the transaction costs and governance costs within
DAOs versus comparable firm or market forms of coordination. In particular,

23

quantifying these costs forms the basis for comparative static institutional analysis. From an empirical perspective, such an examination must begin with case
studies of particular application domains before building to sectoral data sets.
For example:
• Exchanges. What are the costs within centralized exchanges such as
Coinbase versus those in decentralized (and DAO-governed) exchanges
such as Uniswap? How do costs compare between even different decentralized exchanges?
• Unions. What are the collective action costs within traditional labor
unions versus in those in (theorized) DAO-based unions [13]?
• Courts. What are the governance costs within traditional governance
institutions such as courts as compared with those in blockchain-based
dispute resolution systems such as Kleros, Celeste, and Aragon Court?
• Open source. Open-source software is a good example of a public good
that is easier to build than to maintain [104], and DAOs have previously
been theorized as an evolution of open-source communities [165]. In a
DAO, what is the balance between costs associated with developing such
goods and costs associated with maintenance and operations; how do these
costs compare with costs in typical open source communities?
Note: while institutional comparative statics is an empirical research exercise, it is also a market test [11], as we expect that DAOs with lower relative
costs will survive and grow, whereas DAOs with higher costs will be outcompeted by alternative forms of organization. Of course, that claim only holds in
the long run and under the selection pressure of fair and robust market competition, so there are many reasons that short or medium run results may depart
from economic optimal conditions and predictions.

3.3

Corporate governance and principal agent problems

Summary: Research and best-practices in corporate governance can help inform
existing DAO practices, especially with respect to principal agent problems between managers and owners. On the other hand, there are many open questions
about whether and how DAOs can imitate various aspects of corporate structure.
Separation of ownership and control is an important source of value in the
modern corporation, but it is costly and requires governance. The field of corporate governance studies this trade-off and its economic consequences, though
its results apply far beyond traditional corporations, e.g. principal agent problems between labor unions and union bosses. For example, Davidson and Potts
2022 [93] argue that corporate governance, not democratic voting, is the correct
model for understanding decision-making in DAOs. DAOs offer the prospect of
significantly reducing agency problems in organizations through lowered costs
of governance and collective-decision making, e.g. through new forms of liquid

24

democracy. But aside from the typical social choice critiques of mechanisms
such as liquid democracy, many of these mechanisms expose agents to higher
information and attention costs. Some of these costs may be offset with greater
potential for automation.
A central line of open questions relates to what we can learn from from
models and structures explored in the corporate governance literature, covering decision-making hierarchy, accountability (to boards or other entities), and
measures of success. What best practices should DAOs learn from traditional
corporate governance, and what best practices should they reject? If a DAO
chooses to, how can it appoint board(s) of directors, advisors, and C-suite executives with roles and powers as expected in modern corporations? Is there room
for an on-chain CEO? More generally, can DAOs and smart contracts change
the parameters of principal agent problems? On the economics of corporate
governance, see Jensen and Meckling [150], Fama and Jensen [109], Shleifer and
Vishny [249]. On applications to blockchains see Yermack [289].

3.4

Dynamics and strategy

Summary: Like traditional firms, DAOs need to make strategic decisions based
on an evaluation of their internal constraints as well as of the external, macroeconomic environment. Microeconomic and macroeconomic theories can help
provide the analytic foundations for DAO strategy, especially for competition
and cooperation within an ecology of other DAOs, L1s, and traditional institutions such as governments.
A range of questions also concern the dynamics of DAOs. There are the internal dynamics i.e. how we expect a particular DAO to evolve and change over
time; these dynamics can be measured through a range of variables including organizational structure, code, revenue, activities, and culture. There are external
dynamics, which relate to the behavior and evolution of populations of DAOs
within an ecology of other types of economic organization. Between the internal
and external dynamics is the emerging field of DAO strategy (and DAO policy),
which is effectively how to navigate the microdynamics and macrodynamics in
a world of both other DAOs, other competing organizations and institutions,
and other complementary organizations and institutions in the network ecology.
DAO strategy will thus include study of phenomena including DAO-to-DAO
partnerships [89], mergers and acquisitions (ref. Fei and Rari [216], Gnosis and
xDAI, Hermes and Polygon), and DAO-to-government relations. These phenomena give rise to a range of specific questions, including:
• What are the conditions and best-practices for strategic cooperation between DAOs? How do smart contracts, token swaps, and other technical
interfaces change the costs and incentives for such relationships?
• How can token swaps between DAOs support coalitional dynamics within
DAO markets?

25

• What determines coalition formation within DAO ecosystems? What are
the dynamics between economic and political coalitions?
• What is the role of inter-DAO governance in structuring the markets that
DAOs participate in? E.g. the role of competition governance, antitrust
authority, and industry associations or consortia.
• What are the costs and benefits of governmental lobbying by DAOs? Empirically, which DAOs are already contributing to such lobbying, and for
what reasons?
Many problems that arise in the arena of DAO strategy are specific to
the layer 1 (L1) blockchain that hosts the DAOs. For example, the InterBlockchain Communication (IBC) protocol in Cosmos allows communication
between chains; each chain in Cosmos effectively functions as a little DAO connected to other DAOs by bridges.3 There is competition between bridges, and
the bridges are not fungible with each other, which is a problem.
• How does bridge competition or strategic partnerships interact with L1
chain competition?
• What is the role of L1 foundations and protocols with ecosystems? How
do we balance the power of these foundations and ecosystems with the
DAOs that operate within them?
• How should L1s fund different DAOs and organizations? What’s the right
distribution?
• How can and should L1 foundations support (and possibly regulate) DAOs
and other initiatives working on top of their infrastructure?
• When the costs of bargaining are too high, public regulation is more efficient; this is the basis of the institutional possibility frontier analysis, see
Djankov et al. [100]. Insofar as L1s represent a form of public regulation
on DAOs and other players in the ecosystem, in what circumstances does
public provision or standardization at an infrastructural level make more
sense than having it be organized at the level of governance, through a
DAO?

3.5

Tokenomics and platform economics

Summary: Many DAOs are governed through tradeable tokens. ‘Token economics’ or ‘tokenomics’ is a term given to the economic incentives entrenched
3 Note that IBC-style communication requires “fast finality" but the current architecture
of Ethereum makes this hard. Figuring out how to extend additional bridge functionality to
EVM-based architectures is a problem for computer scientists.

26

within a token’s smart contract or protocol, and the particular fiscal and monetary policies DAOs may implement for these tokens through governance. Additional research on tokenomics can help expose the limitations and tradeoffs of
tokens and coin-voting as a mechanism for governance.
Tokenomics relies on the same first principles as platform economics, as designers aim to imbue their tokens with ‘utility’ to satisfy regulatory constraints.
Utility most commonly takes the form of facilitating transactions within a platform economy; the supply side provides a service, the demand side provides the
service, and the token is incorporated as a tool to facilitate transactions between
actors who are not assumed to trust each other [106, 265].
Another common consideration is how to initialize token supply across actors contributing labor and capital prior to token release; the initial coin offering
(ICO) craze led to large distributions of tokens to founders and investors. A second wave of projects followed the Fair Launch principle [233] which emphasized
all stakeholders starting on an equal playing field. When considering systems
where tokens are used for voting, it is especially important to consider the initial
token distribution.
One of the most exciting but also most challenging intersections between
DAOs and tokens is the concept of a dynamic supply token: tokens which do
not have a fixed total supply but rather have rule systems and parameterized
smart contracts which determine how they are created and destroyed. The
term “governance surface" was first used to describe the set of rules governing
the parameters of the RAI token [290]. Other large DAOs, such as MakerDAO,
actually govern parameters which directly and indirectly determine the supply
of tokens and the risk borne by token holders.
Tokens are commonly traded on secondary markets such as decentralized
exchanges (DEXes), and the prices on these exchanges impact those tokens
effectiveness both in their roles as platform economy enablers and as skin-inthe-game for governance. Mechanisms such as constant function market makers,
DEX aggregators and bonding curves are used to provide liquidity, and in ideal
settings reduce volatility [291, 293].
Additional economic incentives associated with tokens are subsidies and
grants. Subsidies generally target increased adoption and involve distributing
tokens to server providers and/service consumers. The concept of yield farming
involves users jumping from token to token engaging precisely to capture these
subsidies. Curve pioneered the concept of gauge weights where their DAO votes
on how to allocate their subsidies across various pools. This kicked off a process wherein a DAO emerged to capture controlling interest in another DAO
[270]. In the Balancer DAO, users faced down and eventually came to a compromise with a whale who insisted on placing high gauge weights on a pool they
controlled in order to capture subsidies [42]. While grants are notably less complex than programmatic subsidies, they most directly surface the relationship
between DAOs and traditional challenges in treasury management and public
finance [139]. Unsurprisingly, a class of ‘protocol politicians’ has emerged to attempt to steer decision-making, especially financially impactful decision making
in DAOs.
27

Due to the prevalence of DAOs with a tradeable governance token, token
design cannot be cleanly separated from governance. Indeed, governance tokens
are often used (perhaps more often used) for speculation rather than for their
intended governance functions. Many authors have raised various critiques of
token-based governance [237, 60]. Thus, a key question of tokenomics as applied to DAOs is how to prevent governance tokens from becoming an end in
themselves. How can DAOs distinguish between voting rights and other considerations?
But for the foreseeable future, many DAOs will still be funded and governed
by a form of token-based governance; DAOs with tokens have proven to be
an effective mechanism to raise capital for enterprise operations. Given this, a
number of questions arise:
• What’s the right way to do token distributions, both the initial distribution
as well as ongoing distributions? Tokens tend to be heavily concentrated
in the hands of initial founders, which leads to centralization and gives
contributors less buy-in.
• What is the right way to distribute / manage tokens in a given treasury?
a lot of DAOs seem to have just one token, so one sees huge fluctuations
in the value of these treasuries, which is problematic. Can hybrid models, which use a mix of transferrable and soul-bound tokens, provide the
benefits of marketable tokens while minimizing the downsides?
• DAOs hold financial assets (digital or real) in collective ownership for
future use and disbursement. How can principles of optimal capital management and portfolio diversification developed from principles of modern
finance (e.g. Markowitz’s modern portoflio theory, Miller’s work on corporate finance, Fama and French on risk factors [108]) apply to DAOs?
Note that this question is tightly coupled with legal questions of liability,
ownership, and legal / fiduciary responsibilities that vary depending on
the DAO’s particular legal structure [286].

3.6

Labor economics

Summary: Many DAOs, especially protocol DAOs, constitute a new way of organizing production and labor that has evolved from the open source movement
and various modes of peer production. Research in labor economics can help us
understand this “future of work" and identify more productive and equitable arrangements. Further, organized labor has many structures and institutions that
could benefit from DAO-based infrastructure, but there are many practical and
theoretical difficulties standing in the way of adoption that additional research
could help us bridge.
A large range of standard analysis in labor economics that has previously
focused on firms and markets carries over to the analysis of employment and
work in DAOs. See Ilyushina and Macdonald [145] for a review of this emerging
field with a focus on new types of employment. Open questions include:
28

• How many people work for DAOs, and what do they do? Some preliminary
statistics exist in industry aggregators such as DeepDAO, Messari, and
Dune, but a rigorous global survey would be extremely relevant here.
• What labor and employment relationships are being set up in the DAO
context, and how do they interact with existing labor and employment
rights, gig work paradigms, and ownership structures? Do DAOs form
a structurally new mode of joint employee ownership? How does labor
contract automation interact with labor rights and current practices?
• How might DAOs be used by unions? For example, unions run elections
that could benefit from some of the privacy and security properties DAOs.
• How does DAO infrastructure shift the operation of labor markets? What
new types of organizations are possible?
• How do bounties incentivise, and what particular tasks are best done
through bounties? Note that bounty-based compensation is often inappropriate for ongoing software contributors, who heavily front-load learning.
• What are the leading/main DAO compensation/reward primitives?

3.7

Social choice

Summary: Use of newly-theorized mechanisms in social choice such as quadratic
voting and variants of liquid democracy by DAOs have been the subject of considerable discussion as well as actual implementation in some cases. As such,
DAOs represent an interesting testbed for experimentation within social choice
and an exciting new source of data; social choice can also suggest improvements
to existing governance within DAOs.
Social choice theory is an important body of work that is relevant to DAO
mechanism design. At the same time, DAOs provide a testing ground for how
social choice mechanisms perform in a real-world setting. Some of the social
choice and DAO design questions are:
1. Applicability and effectiveness of quadratic voting. Quadratic voting has clear applicability to the allocation of public goods, but its creators
themselves have stated that “applications to politics . . . or corporate governance . . . remain far more speculative and are not advisable without
further experimentation at smaller scales," despite citing their own work
suggesting possible application in both domains [170]. Although there has
been a great deal of theoretical interest, quadratic voting has not found
many applications in DAO governance to date. It has been “much discussed but rarely implemented" [200]. What are possible ways in which
quadratic voting can contribute to DAO governance? What are the practical limitations such as evasion through creating multiple identities akin
to a Sybil attack? How would quadratic voting (and quadratic funding)
29

in DAOs affect minority rights and the influence of majority stakeholders? What would be the real-world implications of quadratic voting for
the efficient allocation of resources and decision-making within DAOs?
2. Long-term vs. short-term decision-making. What are the observable effects of short-term incentives on DAO decision-making? How can
DAOs be structured to prioritize long-term sustainability over short-term
gains?
3. Iterative decision-making. How can DAOs implement iterative decisionmaking processes that adapt to real-time feedback? What are the advantages and potential pitfalls of rapid iteration in DAO governance? How
can existing ideas from cybernetics and control theory provide a lens for
thinking about these questions?
4. Hybrid voting systems. Some DAOs implement parallel or hierarchical
voting systems that may employ different voting methods in stages of a
single proposal process or within parallel tracks and grant programs. How
can diverse voting methods (like ranked-choice voting, quadratic voting,
and liquid democracy) be cohesively integrated within a DAO? What are
the emergent properties of DAOs that adopt hybrid voting systems?
5. Vote buying. Systems such as Paladin and Bribe Protocol facilitate vote
buying of governance tokens. Can vote buying enhance DAO governance?
Vote buying can capture intensity of preferences, but it can also be a
vehicle for malicious actors to secure control. What is the balance of
positive and negative on that front, and how can that balance be addressed
by structuring the vote buying system with appropriate incentives and
limitations?
6. Applicability and effectiveness of liquid democracy. Blockchain
governance includes multiple instances of the use of liquid democracy,
and scholars have examined the performance and characteristics of some
prominent cases. [178] provides an excellent example of one such study.
The study captures the actual behavioral patterns of participating voters, raising questions such as what to make of the apparent tendency of
the studied instances of liquid democracy to concentrate voting among
a few delegatees. There also is a substantial theoretical literature on
the strengths and limitations of various liquid democracy implementations both from the vantage point of the possibility or impossibility of
embodying an effective decision process and from the vantage point of
computational feasibility. A prominent example is [29]. These theoretical
studies are of obvious relevance to DAOs. A combination of theoretical
and observational work can provide answers to the question of whether
liquid democracy has a role to play in DAO governance, and, if so, which
implementations are likely to be most effective and desirable both with
respect to decision outcomes and power dynamics.

30

Many of these methods have potential in the context of DAO governance,
but, at present, their effectiveness and desirability is unclear. We are only in
the early stages of gaining understanding on that front. That makes studying
the methods both theoretically and observationally all the more important.

Глава 4

Ethics
Editor: Reuben Youngblom. Contributors: Reuben Youngblom,
Joshua Tan, Tara Merk.

DAOs are a powerful tool for organizing and governing digitally-constituted
entities, but little attention has been paid to the potential ethical implications
of housing jurisdictionless, corporate-like structures on an immutable substrate.
Despite this, or perhaps because of it, ethical questions abound, ranging from
the practical (e.g. are there moral obligations when architecting a DAO?) to the
meta (e.g. what kind of ethics are embodied within the DAO structure?) to the
ontological (e.g. who is morally culpable if a DAO performs an unethical action?
Are DAOs moral agents?). Finding universally-accepted answers to all of these
questions may prove to be an intractable problem, but hopefully just being
aware of some of the open questions will give us an edge as we think through
the answers or, more pessimistically, arm us with the requisite knowledge to
make good decisions as unforeseen ethical issues inevitably crop up. Early work
on DAO ethics has focused largely on DAOs as tools for ethical enforcement
[263], or blockchain ethics within organizations [246], or, even more generally, on
financial ethics, but this space can be significantly expanded. Useful fields that
may offer insights could be moral theory [102], tech ethics [45], or organizational
ethics [156], among others.
In exploring DAO ethics, it is critical to keep in mind that if DAOs are, for
example, capable of being leveraged for unethical ends, this does not automatically equate to “bad." The crux of this exercise is, in part, to examine the extent
to which DAOs might be used unethically (but also explore other questions like
their moral agency, etc.), primarily so that this line of thinking simply gets surfaced—it’s very possible that, once the potential negative externalities of DAOs
are collected and analyzed, the community still sees DAOs as representing a
significant net positive. Further complicating the issue is the idea that the very
definition of DAOs can be a bit squishy, and as affordances change, so too does
the ethical landscape. For instance, a true smart-contract-based DAO, running
on a decentralized virtual machine, that is entirely governed by on-chain code,
should perhaps be considered differently than a “DAO In Name Only" (DINO),
such as a loosely-organized Discord group or similar. To take this a step further, many of the issues raised below won’t apply to most DAOs, and this is by
design. The important question is not whether most DAOs are reasonable, but
rather, what is possible at the edges?
As an important note, it is also good to keep in mind that, while devolving
into full ethical relativism is likely to be unhelpful, ethics tend to be (or, at

31

least, are arguably) subjective or relative. When statements about ethics are
made in relation to DAOs, it’s useful to understand any claims about “ethical"
or “unethical" as “whatever an individual understands to be ethical or unethical
in this context."

4.1

Can DAOs be unethical?

Summary: What capacities do DAOs have to cause harm in the world? Understanding the ways in which DAOs can be leveraged to create positive change
is important, but so is understanding how they might be used to further immoral ends. What kind of undesirable (unethical, net negative, etc.) actions are
enabled by DAOs?
As noted elsewhere in this document, there are over 4000 active DAOs that
collectively manage over $20 billion USD. By any metric, this is a non-negligible
industry that can affect similarly non-negligible change on the world. Given
this potential, it’s important to consider the full scope of possible positive impacts that DAOs may have on organizations [43], labor [127], coordination [144],
computation, and the like, but equally as important to explicitly illuminate any
potential negative externalities. This is particularly dangerous if we believe that
DAOs have the potential to be a tool (or, hopefully, one of many tools) that
can be used to reshape society. Then, if DAOs are able to have an unknown
but significant impact on the world, it seems shortsighted to assume that the
only outcome(s) are likely to be positive. Given this, it is worth questioning the
extent to which DAOs are capable of evil. This is a two-part question or, at
least, a question that can be interpreted in one of two ways. One interpretation
asks whether or not DAOs, as a structure, are able to cause negative consequences that we might consider to be unethical (above and beyond what might
be possible as individuals, or under existing coordination architectures). The
second is whether DAOs, as a structure, ought to be held morally responsible
for these negative consequences—in other words, whether or not they are true
moral agents (see below ).
Of course, the answer to whether or not DAOs are able to cause negative
consequences is almost certainly “yes," in the same way most things have “the
potential" to make the world worse if they are bent into service in such a way
by the wrong individuals. Still outstanding, however, are targeted conversations
around scenarios that are among the most likely to occur, and what these scenarios mean in practice. This requires community input, as no one small group
of academics has the perspective or the collective intelligence to do this well. To
that end, it is a worthwhile exercise to think through the ways in which DAOs
could be leveraged as a tool for evil. For example:
• DAOs could be leveraged to defraud retail investors
• DAOs can encode business ethics, but then can also encode rules/outputs
that we would consider unethical, e.g. price gouging

32

• DAOs can enable markets for coordination around goods and services that
serve antisocial ends, e.g. organ markets or assassination markets
• DAOs might replace traditional corporate structures with something that
is ultimately worse and less equitable, either from a financial perspective
or beyond
Further exercises might include (a) placing these within the larger context
along a spectrum of good vs. evil; and (b) considering mitigating solutions.

4.2

Are DAOs moral agents?

Summary: It’s not clear whether or not DAOs, as “autonomous" organizations,
ought to be considered full (or part) moral agents, and thus whether or not they
should be held ethically liable for their actions. Or, if DAOs themselves are not
held ethically responsible, who—if anyone—should be?
A “moral agent" is an entity capable of being held ethically accountable for
their actions, as they have the ability to do things like conceptualize distinctions
between right and wrong, to formulate plans of action that can be against one’s
better judgment or interests, and to put these plans of action into motion [213].
Whether or not DAOs (or, indeed, any organization) rises to this level is a sticky
question.
As an imperfect starting point, it may be helpful to think about organizational structures we are more familiar with: say, a U.S. corporation. On some
level, we believe that the actual entity that is a corporation can be held responsible for the unethical actions performed by said entity—not only are corporations recognized as “legal people" in a number of jurisdictions [279], but most
jurisdictions also levy punishments for misdeeds committed by the corporation
primarily at the “corporate entity" level [83], and they (as an entity) can arguably even engage in moral interactions [175]. In other ways, this does not fully
track with our intuition of a corporation, which is, realistically, an inanimate
shell that is incapable of acting without human intervention. To reconcile this,
philosophers have proposed the idea of “group agency," underpinned by the idea
that groups can often “intend" to act (in the same way even a humanless corporation “intends" to act by virtue of its existence), and can even intentionally
act in ways that none of the decision-making, input-providing humans expect or
want the group to act [39]. Interestingly, this is also often formulated In terms
of corporate culture as an emergent property that is unable to be reduced to
any individual beyond macro intentions and coincidence [229].
The overarching ethical question here is whether DAOs, specifically, have
this group agency and/or can “intend" to act. This is, in part, a question about
the implications of autonomy as defined within a DAO context. Shepherd [248]
has likened corporations to “extremely dangerous psychopaths [...] capable of
manipulating their own responses to achieve the ends they truly value"—a sentiment worth exploring further by extending the thought process to DAOs. The
psychopathic tendencies of corporations is due less to the individuals existing

33

within/around the corporate sphere, and more to the environmental factors (up
to and including collective culture) that enable a corporation to act in certain
ways. Is this notion of group agency, possibly catalyzed by environmental factors, a reasonable framework to apply to DAOs, given that they are a similar
type of organization, but without many of the controls found in traditional corporations (size, scope, jurisdictional pressures, permissions, centralized control,
etc.)?
Other open questions include:
• Do DAOs have moral agency?
• What might be determinative of moral agency for a DAO?
• Who is responsible if a DAO does something anti-social (or evil, etc.)?
• What exactly do we mean when we say DAOs are “autonomous"?
• What external factors, if any, can influence the behavior of a DAO?

4.3

Running an ethical DAO

Summary: Are there ethical obligations to consider when constructing a DAO,
and if so, how ought a DAO be architected such that it follows ethical best practices?
How do we run a DAO ethically; alternately, how do we code an ethical
DAO?This, too, is a multi-part question. DAOs are capable of being used as a
tool for evil.However, most nouns can be used for evil, though we don’t consider
most things inherently immoral. The more interesting question is the extent
to which we (as a community) have an obligation to ensure that DAOs are not
used unethically and the steps we ought to take to achieve this. How does one
run a DAO ethically? Is there a framework or a set of best practices that can be
followed such that we strike a balance between ethical norms that vary between
cultures?
Perhaps a good reference can be found in the field of bioethics. Likely as a
way of recognizing that overly-prescriptive rules don’t allow for the flexibility
to make nuanced ethical decisions in real time, the best-practices framework in
(western) bioethics is composed of four guiding principles: Justice, Beneficence,
Non-malevolence, and Respect for Autonomy [28]. One open question is whether
constructing a similar framework would be helpful for DAOs, as well as what
should be included in this framework. Future work will include fleshing out
and defining the components that the community finds most relevant, but a
potential framework can be found below.
Potential framework components:
• Transparency
• Equity
• Immutability
34

• Prosocial purpose
• Respect for autonomy

Глава 5

Law
Editors: Joni Pirovich, Primavera De Filippi. Contributors: Joni
Pirovich, Chris Wray, Morshed Mannan, Primavera de Filippi, Silke
Noa Elrifai, Tara Merk.

As novel mechanisms for organizing and governing, DAOs raise a host of
legal issues and risks. Given the scope of existing legal rules, DAO practitioners
have repeatedly highlighted the need for greater legal certainty [125], particularly concerning the sharing of ownership or rights to govern in DAOs with
tokens [282]. This includes legal certainty on liability issues for DAO members
and contributors [112], as well as potential liability for the organization itself,
including when the DAO has been incorporated or formed as a legal entity distinct from its members [149]. More legal certainty has also been demanded for
structuring the interaction between DAOs and traditional entities, particularly
non-Web3 native organizations, including in relation to the ownership of traditional physical assets (e.g. real estate or land) [232] and the engagement of
contributors [145]. Furthermore, DAO practitioners are curious to better understand the regulatory landscape and where the application of existing law should
be clarified versus reformed in order to formulate clearer policy demands. Lastly,
many practitioners are interested in exploring whether and how legal tools can
improve governance structures and accountability within DAOs [202].

5.1

Legal definition

Summary: Legal jurisdictions have a hard time classifying DAOs using existing
entity types. Legal research can contribute insights as to where existing legal
frameworks can be applied to DAOs and when new regulatory approaches are
required.
DAOs currently face many open problems that could benefit from increased
attention from the legal community. On the one hand, some legal scholars question the feasibility of DAOs being alternatives to the traditional corporation
[183]. On the other hand, other scholars observe that while existing laws are
well-equipped to address certain challenges presented by DAOs, there are sociotechnical features of DAOs (e.g., fluid transnational membership, pseudonymous
contributions) and the open-source protocols they govern (e.g. what smart contract parameters are subject to governance) that ‘test’ the boundaries of legal
orders—requiring amendment of the law, a reassertion of existing laws, or a
complete reappraisal of how the law perceives certain activities and transactions [96]. These unique features present a challenge to adequately classifying
DAOs as existing default entity types (e.g., general partnerships, unincorporated associations) across jurisdictions [143, 195, 235, 236, 277] or ‘wrapping’
35

DAOs (or parts of DAOs) into existing legal entity forms, such as corporations,
cooperatives or other for-profit and nonprofit entities [49].

5.2

Legal liability

Summary: Lack of limited liability is a major concern for DAO participants, as
is the potential liability arising from governance participation. Legal researchers
can analyze and create frameworks to help address core concerns both for the
community DAO practitioners and regulators.
One major overarching issue that legal scholarship can contribute to is helping us better understand the specific liability risks for members and contributors
when operating through a DAO that is not wrapped in a legal entity (whether
registered or unregistered, noting that general partnerships and unincorporated
associations can exist as legal entities without registration), thereby not benefiting from separate legal personality or limited liability [77]. While the risk of
joint and several liability has often been flagged, certain issues can be explored
further:
• What are the grounds on which a claim could be brought against a DAO,
its members and/or contributors?
• What are the duties of members or contributors (including core developers,
administrators or delegates), the fulfillment of which would help avoid such
liability?
• How will claims be brought against DAOs, contributors, or its members,
individually or collectively? Who will bring such claims?
• When are DAOs most vulnerable to such claims (e.g., at times of financial
distress, or following a hack, or strategic forks in the road)?
• What do theories on corporate attribution and rules on attribution tell
us about the attribution and allocation of responsibilities and liabilities in
the context of DAOs?
• What legal protections and tools are available to DAOs and their members
to avoid liability?
• How will such liability be imposed if a judgment is delivered against a
DAO or its members? If a judgment is delivered against a DAO or its
members, how would the remedy be effective and timely if it must be
formally recognised in each jurisdiction that the remedy is to be enforced?
• What civil and criminal remedies are available against DAOs and their
members?
Ongoing legal proceedings (e.g., Ooki, bZx, Tulip Trading) continue to shed
light on how courts view such issues.

36

There are also foreseeable liability risks that have yet to materialize in practice, such as the insolvency of a DAO. While a ‘wrapped’ DAO may be subject
to the insolvency procedures of a traditional entity in the jurisdiction of registration or seat, it remains to be seen how creditors and bankruptcy courts treat
unwrapped DAOs that are unable to pay their debts and how the technical
and governance features of such DAOs figure in procedural arrangements and
substantive considerations. For example, Oasis.app was ordered by the High
Court of England and Wales to use their accidental multisignature signing permissions to return stolen tokens from a vault to the rightful owner [126], which
offers insights into how the legacy justice system relies on such permissions existing whereas DAO practitioners are designing systems to optimize for security
through decentralization so that such permissions do not exist. Research on
the insolvency of general partnerships and unincorporated associations, among
other things, may shed light on this issue.

5.3

Financial regulation

Summary: As DAOs often issue and rely on cryptographic tokens in their governance and operations, the relation of these financial technologies to existing
financial regulation such as securities laws, financial services, and anti-money
laundering regulation and taxation. Legal research can help to discern when and
where existing regulation can apply, inform new regulatory frameworks and innovate by proposing Web3 enabled mechanisms to achieve regulatory equivalence
in these areas.
Other important open issues for research include the relationship of DAOs
with securities, financial services, and anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism
financing (AML/CTF) frameworks designed to prevent, detect and prosecute financial crime, which were developed with legacy system entities with centralized
management and more static membership in mind.
Within securities law, the key question is: should a DAO’s governance tokens be treated as securities? Inherently related to the processes around legal
recognition of DAOs is the question of whether the crypto-tokens required for
governance interactions (i.e. governance tokens) are or should be securities or
otherwise regulated as financial products. A number of governance tokens have
been alleged by the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) as securities,
in legal actions by the SEC against Coinbase, Binance, and others. These lawsuits will proceed over the course of 2022 and 2023, alongside policy efforts in
the US and worldwide to establish the regulatory purview over crypto-tokens as
commodities, securities, or new things for which new regulation is inspired by
financial regulation but not constrained by it.
There are a range of legal questions within AML/CTF. For example, how can
DAOs comply with the objectives and spirit of laws and regulations intended
to combat illicit activities, while still retaining their distinctive features (e.g.
pseudonymous or anonymous contributors)? More fundamentally, given the
shortcomings of existing AML/CTF frameworks [219], can DAOs achieve these
objectives more effectively and in a more privacy-preserving manner than these
37

frameworks? Even more broadly, how can DAOs contribute to the regulatory
discourse on the activities and transactions that are deemed to be (prohibited)
money laundering? DAOs after all provide a fertile ground for experimentation,
enabling novel approaches for structuring the interplay between the technical
and legal codification of rules [94].
Finally, another major open issue for research is taxation: whether and how
should DAOs, their members, and contributors be taxed? How are they already
being taxed? How may double-taxation and penalties be avoided?

5.4

Incorporation and legal recognition

Summary: Various jurisdictions have attempted to better regulate DAOs by creating bespoke legal entity forms for them. More comparative legal research, especially from the law and society perspective, can identify the benefits and tradeoffs of different approaches, contrast how each behaves in the face of exogenous
shocks or changes, and analyze potential convergence of high-level approaches.
A number of jurisdictions have begun introducing legislation that creates
bespoke entity forms for DAOs, starting with the US state of Vermont with its
Blockchain-Based Limited Liability Company in 2018 [287], and followed soon
by the US state of Wyoming amending its corporate law statutes to enable the
registration of DAO LLCs in 2021 [25] and the Marshall Islands also allowing for
such registration (with different conditions) in 2022 [25]. While each of the DAO
legislations are different, the recognition of legal personality and limited liability
of DAOs in all of these jurisdictions are predicated on the DAO registering with
a registrar in their jurisdiction. Most recently, however, in March 2023 the
US state of Utah adopted a DAO Act that will come into force in 2024, which
amends the Utah Revised Uniform Limited Liability Company Act to ‘recognize’
a DAO as a limited liability DAO (an LLD) as equivalent to a Utah LLC so
long as it meets certain requirements, such as appointing a registered agent in
the state of Utah [111]. The Zone Authority of the Catawba Digital Economic
Zone also passed in February 2023 specific legislation to recognise a DAO as a
limited liability company or unincorporated not-for-profit association [6]. There
are several jurisdictions across the globe that are exploring DAO legislation,
including Australia [3], New Hampshire [111], Malta [121], the United Kingdom
[85], and St. Helena [47], while there are others in which academics have called
for their introduction (e.g., North Carolina) [87]. In addition, there have been
jurisdictions like Malta that provide certain legal assurances to DAOs without
recognizing their legal personality yet [77, 190].
Legal recognition of DAOs, and the ensuing questions around regulation
of DAOs as another form of distinct legal person or if that is not appropriate
then the responsibility and liability attribution frameworks that should apply, is
still in its infancy, but there is a proliferation of views on whether and how each
should be best achieved. The LAO had a strong influence on the Wyoming DAO
LLC legislation [4], while MIDAO has championed the incorporation-based approach of registering DAOs by the Marshall Islands [197]. The Utah DAO Act
mirrors many provisions of the COALA Model Law on DAOs, while departing
38

from its text in important respects [111]. And the ongoing discussion on DAO
legislation in Malta reveals that their approach to create a DAITO (Decentralized and Autonomous Innovative Technology Organizations) will also depart
from the approaches mentioned above [121]. Future research could compare
these different legislative approaches to regulating DAOs, particularly from a
law & society scholarship perspective, as well as assess their resilience in the face
of changes brought on by market developments, lawsuits, and other regulatory
actions. It remains to be seen whether there will be a convergence of approaches
on how DAOs are regulated, particularly as the questions outlined above are
addressed, and if one ‘model’ ultimately prevails. Research on private international, stateless, marine law, space law, and transnational law approaches
as applied to DAOs is also of great interest and may inform new innovative
mechanisms to place DAOs within regulatory frameworks.

5.5

Dispute resolution systems

Summary: Smart contracts cannot cover disputes that have not or cannot be
codified in software, forcing DAOs and DAO members to settle disputes and
seek recourse through the legacy legal system. Legal research can contribute to
studies of and solutions for on-chain versions of dispute resolution.
Plain language laws have a number of use-cases that deterministic code cannot cover, and vice versa, meaning that DAO members often have to resort to
interacting with the legacy legal system in order to seek redress for grievances,
to affect assets not governed by a smart contract, or to go around the contract
logic by compelling off-chain enforcement. This suggests a number of different
research questions:
• What has been the result of experiments with existing on-chain dispute
resolution systems such as Kleros, Aragon Court, and Celeste [19]?
• How do such on-chain dispute resolution systems compare with other forms
of alternative dispute resolution? How have they fared? Are there fundamental limits to code-is-law-style dispute resolution systems?
• How do we incentivize more efficient participation and fairer judgments in
these dispute resolution systems?
• Are there ways of integrating smart contract enforcement with other forms
of alternative dispute resolution?
While DAOs may want to interact with legacy legal systems for many reasons
(and their ability to interoperate with the existing legal system may even be a
competitive advantage relative to other forms of online organization), more research is needed to understand how to allow DAOs to become more autonomous
from legacy legal systems.

39

Глава 6

Organizational science
Editors: Rolf Hoefer, Ellie Rennie. Contributors: Rolf Hoefer,
Seth Frey, Sarah Hubbard, Tony Douglas, Scott Moore, Michael
Muthukrishna, Mason Youngblood, Michael Price, Ellie Rennie, Alexia
Maddox, Anna Weichselbraun, Kelsie Nabben, Primavera de Filippi,
Tara Merk.

DAOs constitute a fascinating, rapidly emerging organizational form in the
wild. In a prototypical DAO, on-chain software is central to the organizing
process and every member is able to directly influence the execution of key
organizational decisions. Blockchain infrastructure also offers systematically
rich, granular, and longitudinal data.
DAOs represent one of the most exciting empirical phenomena in organizational science. As of 2022, DAO participants in over 4000 active DAOs collectively managed over $20 billion USD worth of assets in their treasuries. DAOs
are organizations operating in all kinds of industries, organizing around common goals ranging from everything in finance to gaming, politics, culture, arts,
and civil society. One illustration of the potential of DAOs and other Web3
developments comes from reflecting on Web2’s impact on organizational scholarship. The Internet’s second wave made new, unprecedented organizational
forms possible. For example, Wikipedia demonstrated the scalability of flat organizations and the ability of well-designed technological mediation to organize
the incremental contributions of millions of people [222]. Poorly explained by
existing organizational thought, Wikipedia and other examples motivated the
development of Benkler’s theory of peer production, which provided an intellectual foundation for a new generation of organizational scholars [33].
What new organizational forms will DAOs permit, and what flaws will they
reveal in how we conceptualize organizational possibilities? New mechanistic
corrections for the shortcomings of decentralized organization will further advance the frontier that was opened by Web2. New forms of collective ownership
will blur the line between ownership and management regardless of whether they
embrace decentralization. Instantaneous algorithmic design and incorporation
of ephemeral businesses will blur the lines of Williamson’s transaction cost rationale for firm versus market exchange [283]. For their potential to both build
on and extend a century of organizational thought, DAOs merit close attention
from organizational scholars.
In the following we neither claim nor attempt to depict the breadth and
depth of overlap between organizational science and DAOs. Instead, we pick a
few topics we believe are interesting and fruitful explorations for those interested
in DAOs and organizational science.

6.1

Organizational imprinting

Summary: We still do not fully understand why and how emerging organizations
come to adopt their particular social structures and strategies. DAOs, which

40

generate a significant amount of granular, longitudinal data through on-chain
processes, can provide valuable insights into the evolution of social structures
and practices within organizations, offering opportunities to explore dynamics,
histories, and the impact of elements like smart contracts, incentive schemes,
and forks.
A seminal piece in organizational theory is Stinchcombe’s 1965 chapter on
[259]. Over time, this chapter has come to be known for highlighting an observation unique to organizational theory: the phenomenon of organizational
imprinting. Organizational imprinting describes the observation that organizations founded at one time tend to have a different social structure from those
founded at another time. Once an organization forms its social structure, its
social structure tends to persist for an extended period.
While Stinchcombe’s observation is widely taken-for-granted, why and how
emerging organizations come to adopt their social structures and strategies has
been underexplored [135, 151, 152]. In this context, DAOs are interesting because they represent a new, fledgling organizational form. As a novel type
of organization, DAOs are in the process of forming and adopting the social
structures and strategies that will, according to past organizational imprinting
research, persist for a long period of time. This suggests that DAOs represent
a fertile ground for researchers to understand the formation phase of organizational imprinting, including when, why, and how an organization does or does
not become imprinted.

6.2

Evolutionary social science

Summary: Evolutionary social science applies ideas from biology and evolution
to questions in the social domain. DAOs represent a fertile new domain for
developing and testing some of these ideas due to the availability of data, their
use of technical infrastructure that can be precisely characterized, and the speed
at which they evolve.
Historically, much research on organizational imprinting has drawn inspiration from biology and evolution [181] with concepts such as an organization’s
“DNA"; organizations evolving through adaptation and selection pressures [296];
and complex patterns of mutualism [269]. More broadly, the field of evolutionary social science has a long history of applying evolutionary ideas to questions
of social evolution, cultural evolution, and organizational evolution. DAOs represent a fertile new domain for developing and testing some of these ideas.
A research program applying evolutionary ideas to DAOs would need to
include at least three components: conceptual mapping, data and tooling development, and comparative case studies.
1. Conceptual mapping. To apply evolutionary methods to a field, we
need to define a set of evolutionary primitives, in particular mechanisms for
variation, transmission, and variation reductive (which, if adaptive, should
be selective). What is the mechanism by which variation is created within
DAOs? Variation is produced sometimes in the act of transmission—is
41

that true for DAOs? For any evolutionary system you want high fidelity
in transmission, but how much actual transmission is there? Finally, what
are the mechanisms for selection? Are there informal mechanisms, ways
that communities can change, or fork to change? Note: having “genes" or
“building blocks"—e.g. granular privacy primitives—can be useful but it
is not essential for this modeling.
2. Data and tooling development. How does the infrastructure of a
DAO allow a working evolutionary social scientist to engage with either
individual DAOs or the broader ecosystem? Given the issues with off-chain
data, what affordances and tooling exist to allow researchers to understand
and parse what is going on within DAOs? What particular aspects of DAO
data are evolutionary social scientists particularly interested in?
3. Comparative case studies. We want to compare DAO evolution to
existing examples within social evolution, for example the evolution of
churches [115], of constitutions [227], within coding competitions [198],
and of other online communities such as subreddits [266].
Within the scope of such a research program, there are a number of different
open questions:
• Forks. Forks are phenomena where an organization splits from another
organization yet retains the exact same history as the previous organization [34]. Due to its public nature, the data and contracts that define a
DAO can be easily forked as a technical matter. Indeed forks have happened, e.g. SushiSwap from Uniswap or during the attempted takeover of
Steemit, and the threat of forks represent a significant check on bad behaviors by founders and other powerful members of a DAO or blockchain.
• Infrastructure for merging. The US federal government is a way for
states to merge. The EU is another model for merging. Australia is a
very different model. In the infrastructure of a DAO (or a blockchain),
what are the mechanisms that would allow you to explore new possible
configurations and to possibly incentivize merging of communities?
• Cultural evolution. How does the new technical infrastructure of a DAO
enable and constrain the variation, transmission, and variation reduction
of cultural practices within the DAO? How can these infrastructures translate into non-Web3 contexts?
• Simulating cultural evolution. Ideas from cultural evolution could
be particularly useful in simulating DAO behavior. There is a suite of
methods in cultural evolution for simulating how conformity bias, prestige
bias, and payoff bias interact with one another in extremely complex ways,
with norms co-evolving with these biases. Considerable time and expense
has been applied to collect data from social networks that can then be
applied to these models, whereas these methods could be applied directly
42

to DAOs based on already-extant data. Such simulations could eventually
be incorporated into DAO design.
• Theory of cultural evolution. Insofar as they represent interesting
examples of self-governing communities, DAOs could inspire new mathematical treatments of agents’ ability to self-determine and create their
own games, as opposed to traditional treatments that operate within a
tight framework of phenotypes and behavior.
• Cultural traditions as cognitive tools. Cognitive tools are artifacts
or processes that facilitate cognition. These are not just physical things
but also “ways of seeing the world", i.e. cultural traditions. For example, “mountain calendars" from Mexico [107] or “knuckle mnemonics" for
months of the year. What kinds of cultural traditions operate as cognitive
tools within DAO governance and DAO operations? How can existing
infrastructure support such cultural traditions?

6.3

Neo-institutional theory

Summary: Building and maintaining legitimacy is a key concern for traditional
institutions but especially in DAOs, which often govern through flat hierarchies
and informal cultural norms. Neo-institutional theory shifts the focus of research on legitimacy to its communicative aspects and allows for a deeper understanding of how organizations, including DAOs, achieve legitimacy through
language and communication rather than mere diffusion of practices. Thus,
neo-institutional theory can help practitioners and DAO managers navigate the
emergence, intercultural participation, chaos, and complexity that characterize
DAO environments.
For decades, institutional theory and its variances have been a dominant
research stream within organizational science. A core concept in institutional
theory is the concept of legitimacy [36, 98, 120, 242, 261, 298]. While much
work has measured legitimacy as a function of the successful diffusion of organizational practices, the process by which organizations such as DAOs achieve
legitimacy is fundamentally communicative. Consistent with the phenomenological tradition in institutional theory [241], legitimacy is “built upon language
and uses language as its principal instrumentality" [36].
A focus on legitimacy as a communicative phenomenon is interesting for two
reasons. First, from a theoretical perspective, adopting the view of legitimacy as
a communicative concept avoids the suggestion that the diffusion and adoption
of organizational structures, practices, and strategies is evidence of legitimacy.
Organizational structures, practices, and strategies can be sparsely adopted
yet legitimate, and they can be widely adopted yet not legitimate [297, 130].
Focusing on language also resonates with the linguistic turn in institutional
and organizational science [15]. Recent research efforts at the intersection of
entrepreneurship and institutional theory, such as the work on cultural entrepreneurship [151, 182], have started to examine the ways that the legitimacy
of organizations is a function of language, suggesting an emerging body of work
43

that scholars can build on and extend. Second, a focus on legitimation as rooted
in communication is interesting from practitioners’ perspectives [59, 95]. DAOs
are internet-native organizations. Coordination is managed digitally in a fastpaced world. When environmental change is high, organizational systems need
to adapt quickly, and this work is typically facilitated by people who focus almost exclusively on coordination as opposed to execution —and that is the role
of management, or, put into the language of DAOs, that is the role of community
managers and delegates [55].
Persuasion in DAOs often happens more with stories rather than tables,
words rather than numbers, beliefs rather than facts. Managers must become
skilled at persuasion with stories, words, and beliefs. Persuasion increases social
stickiness, and social stickiness is what keeps organizations as communities and
social networks together in the absence of tight, hierarchical structures and
vague incentive structures. The current mintage of DAOs is characterized by
emergence, intercultural participation, chaos, and complexity. Managing these
DAOs requires managers to become skilled communicators. Those who lean on
the knowledge gained from research efforts in institutional theory such as those
on cultural entrepreneurship may benefit tremendously.

6.4

Organizations as complex adaptive systems

Summary: Understanding DAOs as complex adaptive systems (CAS) presents
opportunities to study properties such as path-dependency, sensitivity to initial conditions, emergent changes, and episodic shifts. Researchers can employ
grounded theory and comparative case study approaches to advance empirical
understanding and generate theories around organizational evolution. Additionally, the unique data properties of DAOs offer avenues for fascinating studies
on social networks, dynamic tie evolution, and the use of agent-based models
to project and understand organizational dynamics over time. This stream of
organizational research can further help to address questions of how and why
productive self-organization emerges in organizations and DAOs.
Many DAO participants believe DAOs offer new opportunities for organizational systems to self-organize. There is a real opportunity for academic work
that may help practitioners understand how, when, and why productive selforganization emerges. Much existing work is rooted in views of organizations as
complex adaptive systems evolving at the edge of chaos. Indeed, the contributions of scholars such as Herbert Simon and James March were as fundamental
for the development of complex systems as organization science [251], while Elinor Ostrom explicitly bases her foundational concept of institutional diversity
on the proto-CAS thought of cybernetics [211]. Interestingly, empirical research
in this domain has been slowed down by the lack of appropriate empiricallygrounded data and methods to test researchers’ theoretical hypotheses. DAOs
present an opportunity to not only test these hypotheses but also to inform and
generate new ones.
Complexity, in brief, views systems such as organizations as wholes that
are more than the sum of their parts and even as archetypes for the multi44

scale structure that characterizes emergent complexity [211]. The literature on
complexity highlights properties such as path-dependency, sensitivity to initial
conditions, emergent (uncertain but not random), and episodic changes [30]. Of
particular interest to practitioners in the DAO space might be how to manage
complex organizations while staying true to emergent self-organization [212].
DAOs are a fertile ground with plenty of exceptional data to study selforganization. On-chain data does not suffer from left-censoring; however note
the learnings from the Curve wars regarding manipulation of the governance
that occurs on-chain. Certain datasets have perfect data, obviating the need for
sophisticated statistics to address gaps. The recent explosion of DAOs also offers sufficient freedoms of observation. This presents rich opportunities. On one
hand, grounded theory and comparative case study approaches would advance
our empirical understanding of DAOs. It may also generate theory around organizational evolution. Models of organizational change as punctuated equilibrium
traditionally invoke change as developing from a growing discrepancy between
an organization and its environment. The causal mechanism typically invoked
is organizational inertia. Yet considering organizations as complex adaptive systems suggests alternative mechanisms. For example, organizations may change
via punctuated equilibrium because patterns of both small and large changes
over time can often naturally lead to a pattern of change in the form of a punctuated equilibrium.
Moreover, a unique research opportunity rests in the data properties around
DAOs. Empirically inclined researchers may create fascinating new studies that
leverage this data:
• Researchers may analyze social networks of agents not only at a given
point in time, but dynamically as these social networks evolve over time,
and agents and their organizations begin to co-create each other [295].
Much research in social networks is based on the presence or absence
of connections between some or the other actor. Data related to DAOs
allows researchers to see how ties dynamically evolve. This can be similarly
studied at the dyadic, triadic, cluster, or network levels.
• Researchers viewing organizations as complex adaptive systems can easily
measure, more easily than ever, how a focal actor’s behavior in the current
time period affects the behavior of other actors in the next time period.
• An even more fascinating approach would be to train or condition agentbased models on real-life data points. DAOs may permit faithful implementations and rigorous tests of classic computational models of organizations, from the anarchic garbage can model [84] to Carley’s ORGAHEAD
of organizational adaptation [66]. For example, an agent-based model’s
first iterations modeled using real data and the revealed dynamics could
continue projecting an organization’s evolution in the next few iterations.
Such models would approach scientific work with practitioner work, both
tremendously benefiting from each other via superior, shared understanding and greater empirical and theoretical groundedness.
45

6.5

Organizational methodology in the era of complete
data

Summary: The questions scholars ask about organizations tend to be a function
of the limited data they have access to. As DAOs provide complete data from the
level of individuals to the level of populations of organizations, the completeness
and transparency of this data promises to advance organizational scholarship,
particularly as organizational scholars increasingly work to reconcile and integrate disparate research frameworks.
Organizations are difficult to study. They are typically too big, dynamic, and
unobservable to provide the elements necessary for controlled scientific inquiry.
DAOs correct for this by being highly instrumented, entirely transparent organizations that offer systematically rich, granular, and longitudinal data. The
comprehensiveness of DAO data is atypical of what academics have encountered
to date. As a result, DAOs represent not just a novel empirical setting but an
opportunity to develop and test novel empirical methods that were previously
impossible to apply.
As DAOs rely on on-chain processes for membership, governance, and operations, they generate a wealth of granular, longitudinal data about the evolution
of their social structures and practices. Often this on-chain data does not suffer from typical left-censoring or sampling issues, and, apart from community
moderation, other public data from governance and operational interactions is
uncensored. We have already discussed the longitudinal tracing of how social
structures evolve via on-chain elements, dynamics, and histories such as smart
contracts, incentive schemes, and forks, but many other opportunities remain.
Looking ahead, this data could be used to power multiscale studies that
bridge (or challenge) Hannan and Freeman’s five levels of organizational analysis: members, subunits, individual organizations, populations of organizations,
and communities of populations of organizations [135]. This is important because the major paradigmatic differences driving contemporary organizational
scholarship are more a function of data availability than any epistemological
differences. An ideal example lies in firm- versus population-level theories of
organizational survival. Frameworks like the firm-level “resource-based view"
rely on behavioral data of members of organizations to discover internal determinants of organizational success. By contrast, frameworks like the populationlevel organizational ecology view rely on data about populations of interacting
organizations to reveal environmental determinants of success. While scholars
acknowledge that both must be true [128, 177, 275], the difficulty of collecting large, complete, multi-scale datasets has made it impossible to understand
how internal and environmental theories of organizational performance interact and complement each other. From this perspective, DAOs promise to be
the substrate upon which organizational scholars develop a unified multi-scale
conception of firm success and even emergent social order.
Looking even further ahead, it is important to recognize that the people who
start and operate organizations are themselves organizational scholars engaged
in the challenge of building a social system capable of learning and adapting
46

[245]. Classic work by March emphasizes the spotty and imperfect nature of trying to theorize about a single organization while situated within it [192]. With
their automation, instrumentation, standardization, and transparency, DAOs
promise to transform organizational learning by making it easier for members
to automatically register and learn from each others’ mistakes both within organizations and across many organizations. Although it has long been recognized
that organizational learning can happen at the level of communities of populations of organizations [27], even lessons at that scale tend to be anecdotal, and
lack the automatic, systematic comprehensiveness of potential future DAO-toDAO organizational learning systems.

6.6

Organizational ethnography

Beyond analyzing DAOs through their on-chain and quantitative data, qualitative research methods are widely employed throughout organization studies.
In this section, we make a case for ethnography, a specific type of qualitative
research method, as a means to surface DAO-based social phenomena and practices that may push the boundaries of existing disciplines.
Ethnography is a qualitative approach in which the researcher is immersed
in the phenomena and community they are studying. It is typically used to
make visible the invisible, surface new and recurring questions and themes, and
challenge normative assumptions with an eye to identifying discrepancies that
exist between what communities say they do versus what they actually do. The
process involves producing “thick description" [123], meaning an interpretative
account not just of actions, but the meanings, symbols and structures that inform behaviors. As ethnography looks to “first-hand" knowledge rather than
relying exclusively on second-hand accounts [142], researchers will spend significant time with the people, communities, and contexts they are researching
to understand their language, design, rules, and customs. In addition to observation field notes, ethnographic data may include interviews, focus groups,
collecting data across multiple media sites [20] or even computational data [187].
In the case of DAO research, the ethnographer’s task lies in documenting
and understanding the social dynamics underpinning a particular context and
the interactions among both human and non-human actors constituting a field
site. A DAO community is not always the thing being studied; the ethnographer
may be tracing various phenomena such as values, standards, infrastructures,
and automated policies by observing how they occur in and through DAOs.
The ethnographer may choose to extend upon traditional ethnographic research methods by including the study of computer mediated social interactions,
the study of online communities and the use of digital technologies in data collection and analysis [9, 217]. For instance, ethnographers studying in DAOs
may need to follow both human and non-human actors [243], and make sense of
their interaction with each other and the community’s wider social and material
context [173]. Specific techniques such as situational mapping, arena mapping,
and positional mapping [79, 80] may be used to synthesize empirical observation without excluding technical actors, infrastructural components, discursive
47

dynamics or the broader context.
Conducting ethnographic research in DAOs and Web3 comes with specific
challenges. Firstly, ethnographers are required to define, access and make sense
of the deluge of data gathered through their field site, including online forums
such as Discord servers. In the context at hand, this requires us to ask questions
such as: Where is the DAO? Where, when and how can we see it, and where
not? Secondly, while ethnographers are relatively free to choose the specific
techniques most appropriate to making sense of their data, it is not always
easy to get informed consent from all actors being observed in a DAO. One
example of an attempt to overcome this challenge is the Telescope consent bot,
developed by Rennie et al. [225] to automate parts of the consent process for
data collection within Discord chats.
To date, researchers have used ethnographic methods to explore the informal
aspects DAO governance [103, 250], cultural dynamics and beliefs in cryptocurrency communities [46, 113], activism in darknet marketplaces [188] and the use
of Web3 technologies as a form of ‘self-infrastructuring’ [204]. Researchers employing ethnographic methods have made valuable contributions to DAO science
by revealing unformalized and somewhat messy off-chain governance dynamics,
anchor on-chain components within specific context and meaning to understand
their mediating capabilities, and by developing new participatory methods to
involve DAO practitioners in the research process. Ethnography is therefore a
promising approach for identifying emergent ‘open problems’ in DAO science.

Глава 7

Political science and philosophy
Editor: Eliza R. Oak. Contributors: Eliza R. Oak, Woojin Lim,
Hélène Landemore, Danielle Allen.

Political science is the systematic study of governance (Goodin and Klingemann, 1998; Roskin, 2005). At the heart of political science is the study of
the transfer and allocation of power in decision-making processes, and of the
emergence and consequences of different governance systems. Studying the governance of DAOs and other digitally-constituted organizations is interesting for
political scientists because (1) DAOs offer a new platform to empirically test
theories from the political science canon; (2) DAOs are actively seeking expert
knowledge to consult their governance design decisions so there is real-world
demand for scholarship on this topic; and (3) as all aspects of society become
increasingly digitized, understanding best-practices for DAO governance paves
the way for re-imagining and potentially re-designing current political processes
[37].
Societies and organizations have puzzled over governance questions for millennia, and the contested idea of democracy—a system of governing which depends on the will of the people—is central to these debates (e.g. [218, 17, 180,
230, 90, 221, 171]). In theory, DAOs present innovative opportunities for collective decision-making, though in practice there are many possibilities for the anti-

48

democratic seizure of DAOs. Insofar as DAOs rely on blockchain-based automated data storage mechanisms and smart contracts, how can challenges related
to technocracy be avoided [63]—and are such automated decision-execution protocols even desirable? How can plutocracy or sybil attacks be avoided, when
common “one-token-one-vote" mechanisms mean that wealthy users can buy a
disproportionate number of tokens and subsequently gain a disproportionate
amount of voting power? Because of these and other problems in practice, more
thought should be dedicated to questions of whether financializing governance
actually make sense—and to formalizing the conditions under which certain
voting models are appropriate.

7.1

Institutions

Summary: As DAOs create political institutions, they confront classic coordination puzzles such as preference aggregation, credible commitments and audience costs, information asymmetry, or representation and accountability. As a
unique empirical setting, DAOs can help political scientists (1) study foundational theories about political institutions and (2) generate novel theories to be
tested in digital governance settings.
The potential problems of tokenized governance raise interesting questions
concerning the design of durable and representative political institutions. Political institutions tend to refer to “the formal and informal rules, procedures, and
organizations that govern the behavior of individuals and groups in a political
system" [134]—that is, the “rules of the game in a society, or more formally,
the humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction" [208]. Scholars
have debated the implications of different types of institutional design, including separation of powers, federalism, the strategic design of non-democratic
institutions, or institutional change. How might these theories map onto the
design of digitally-native governance institutions? For example, does separation
of powers in DAOs prevent any one entity from becoming too powerful [199],
increasing transparency and accountability [179], or does this instead result in
gridlock and indecisive government action [272]? Does dividing power between
central and “regional" entities in DAOs lead to greater democratic participation, as the threat of regional secession (forking?) can create incentives for the
central government to compromise and increase responsiveness [226]? In order
for institutional change to occur in DAOs—where change can occur much more
rapidly—must there still be significant buy-in from political elites and a credible
commitment by political actors to respect the new institutional rules [278]?
How can DAOs avoid elite interest capture? For example, non-democratic
regimes will sometimes create electoral institutions in order to gain information
about who to trust among the ruling elites, meaning these institutions are little
more than performative “window-dressings" of democracy designed to promote
non-democratic regime survival [122].
Other research has examined how despite the same institutional composition, variation in the levels of “civicness" explains why some regional governments are more efficient and more responsive [223]. Recent scholarship has also
49

argued that the disruptive Schumpeterian consequences of blockchains make it
an institutional technology rather than a general purpose technology, and that
blockchains themselves are an instance of institutional evolution [92].

7.2

Turnout

Summary: The coordination challenge in collective choice, which involves aggregating individual preferences, also applies to DAOs, prompting questions about
voter turnout, representation, and accountability. Political science can help
DAOs strike a balance between more participatory decision-making and the inefficiencies caused by uninformed voting, e.g. through new (and old) incentivization methods to address issues of accessibility and quality of participation. The
formal voting mechanisms and informal mobilization strategies that influence
online, token-incentivized civic participation in DAOs remain open questions in
this context.
The coordination puzzle of aggregating individual preferences by some method
such as voting to produce a social outcome (i.e., collective choice) underpins
questions about governance and institutions. Collective choice is shown to involve “surprisingly intransigent paradoxes that seem to challenge the possibility
of fair democratic decision-making” [240]. DAOs similarly confront classic questions of turnout, representation, and accountability as they design their governance institutions. DAOs suffer from similarly low levels of voter turnout to
those documented in the real world and therefore aim to balance the desire for
more participatory and inclusive decision-making processes, without inducing
low levels of participation and inefficiencies from uninformed decision-making
[53]. As DAOs experiment with different voting mechanisms, important questions related to participation arise, for example:
• What are the most compelling ways to incentivize voting participation —
without building-in perverse incentives?
• Is participation due more to lack of interest or lack of accessibility?
• How should we think about the quality of participation? Quality of participation is especially relevant in DAOs where users can earn tokens based
on participation, as this opens up subjective questions about who gets to
decide what type of participation is considered deserving of more tokens.
• How do informal concepts like “do-ocracy" and “lazy consensus" become
relevant and operationalized in these digital contexts?
Open questions remain regarding which individual-level characteristics, institutional factors, and mobilization strategies influence online, token-incentivized
civic participation in DAOs. Do DAO voters, for example, also tend to be individuals with higher levels of income, education, and social status are more
likely to have access to political information and feel a sense of political efficacy [274, 141]? Or do the individual-level characteristics of DAO voters reflect

50

those of early crypto adopters more generally—do they tend to be younger,
male, more dissatisfied with existing institutions and tech-savvy, for example?
Moreover, do DAOs with compulsory voting laws [179], unicameralism [146], or
proportional representation rather than plurality systems [41] also tend to have
higher levels of voter turnout? What mobilization strategies are most effective in
DAOs—for example invoking social pressure by publicizing individuals’ voting
behavior [50], or online variations of get-out-the-vote efforts [129]?

7.3

Real-time experimentation

Summary: DAOs are experimenting rapidly with both traditional and novel governance strategies, with online programmability widening the design space for
what is possible. The rapid experimentation of DAOs provide political scientists a unique and, to date, mostly unexploited opportunity to study the effect of
institutions on political behavior and collective outcomes.
Unlike political governing bodies which historically take decades or even centuries to change, DAOs are experimenting with the design of governing bodies
at exponentially quicker scales (Hall and Smith, 2022). Optimism4 , for example, has designed a bicameral governance structure where governance matters
are divided between the Token House and the Citizens’ House. In the Token
House, an individual with more tokens has more votes. In the Citizen House,
every individual “citizen” is granted one non-transferable citizen token which
yields precisely one vote per individual citizen. Optimism has also created a
system of delegation that allows users to select a trusted third party to make
governance decisions on their behalf, though said user retains full ownership of
their tokens and can choose at any time whether to vote directly instead of via
the delegate. Other DAOs are experimenting with new voting mechanisms including: quadratic voting which allows individuals to express how strongly they
care about a given issue, quorum voting which requires a certain threshold of
votes in order for a proposal to pass, conviction voting in which proposals accumulate enough votes to pass over time, or versions of liquid democracy which
employ elements of both direct and representative democracy.
These and other real-time applications provide political scientists with a
unique opportunity to analyze large amounts of time-stamped, individual-level
data on governance participation. This opens up new opportunities for scholars
to empirically test centuries of political thought as well as test new bold ideas for
voting and governance. This could offer scholars and practitioners the opportunity to apply lessons from DAO governance to potentially improve political
processes and coordination in our ever-digitizing society.

7.4

Self-governance

Summary: Previous scholarship has explored decentralized forms of governance
in non-state realms, shedding light on factors that contribute to successful self4 Optimism is a Layer 2 network and can be thought of as a sort of blockchain built on top
of another “Layer 1” blockchain to reduce fees and transaction speed.

51

governance and coordination which are relevant for understanding the governance of decentralized digital governance. Political science can help address
questions about power allocation, participant vetting, community norm enforcement, and the ideal level of gatekeeping in self-governing communities, while
considering the coexistence with external regulatory jurisdictions and the importance of informal authority and community building in decentralized organizations.
Contemporary political science increasingly includes the study of non-state
realms of governance, including the governance of firms and other governmentrecognized legal entities; tribes and other socio-political groups; or gangs, protest
movements, and other non-state networks. Scholars have documented how and
when decentralized governance and coordination is successful in the absence
of strong formal governing institutions, which is relevant for understanding the
governance of distributed online networks. 13th-century Mediterranean traders,
for example, created a unique institutional system based on norms and practices that promoted trust, cooperation, and reputation-building among traders,
enabling traders to overcome the risks associated with long-distance trade and
resolve disputes without violence [22]. Other scholarship has examined the role
of social capital, villager associations, and informal monitoring networks in facilitating the provision of public goods in the absence of democratic or bureaucratic
mechanisms of accountability [271].
Self-governance can exist in the absence of formal rules. In examining the
conditions in which criminal groups exert state-like functions in their spheres of
influence, scholars have documented how the internal organization of a Mexican
mafia gang functions much like a traditional cooperative with a written constitution [167], whereas a prison gang lacks clearly defined control rights and is
worker-owned, with each member having a vote and relying on an internal rule
structure [252]. To gain membership into either a prison or mafia gang, recruits
must make costly sacrifices to improve member quality, limit free riding, and reveal information about the recruit’s abilities and dedication. DAOs face similar
questions regarding power allocation, participant vetting to improve quality of
deliberation, and community norm enforcement in self-governing organizations.
Other explanations for self-governance look beyond state solutions or marketoriented approaches to explain how societies and groups regularly devise rules
and enforcement mechanisms to govern the commons [210]. This scholarship reveals that these types of self-governing cooperatives tend to work because they’re
rather homogeneous and have “clearly defined community boundaries” [231]; extensions of commons scholarship to online communities have demonstrated the
framework’s power for understanding virtual and computational resource governance as well [119, 163]. As DAOs aspire to be flatter and more egalitarian
with power distributed across tokenholders who cast votes, this open, participatory, and heterogeneous structure raises questions about how best to scale. In
terms of clearly defining community boundaries, DAOs face questions regarding the ideal level of gatekeeping—how open, and how participatory should a
values-aligned, mission-driven DAO be, and who should decide this?
Of course, DAOs do not operate in a vacuum and are exploring ways to
52

self-govern while co-existing with evolving external, formal regulatory jurisdictions. Similarly, existing research examines the relationships that arise through
interactions between state and informal actors at the local level (e.g., hostility,
acquiescence, collusion) and seeks to understand what factors make this type of
governance stable over time. Baldwin [23], for example, argues that unelected
traditional leaders (chiefs) in Africa improve the responsiveness of democratic
governments by helping to hold political leaders accountable, depending on how
well local politicians work with chiefs. Just as political scientists focus on many
aspects of governance beyond the formal constitutions, there are many aspects
of DAO governance beyond questions about hard-coded governance rules, for
example online community building and informal authority delegation.

7.5

Global governance

Summary: Similar to nation-states regulating themselves without a central governing body and designing their own mechanisms for enforcement, DAOs operate without a central governing DAO and alongside territorial nation-state laws.
The scholarship on non-state actors and international institutions is relevant for
understanding inter-DAO operations both between DAOs, and in the context of
national regulatory landscapes.
Studying DAOs is also useful for theorizing about how technological innovations might transform transnational interactions between nation states and
non-state actors. Within political science, the subfield of international relations (IR) examines why, and how, states and non-state actors interact. This
involves interactions between sovereign states, as well as interactions between
non-state actors across international borders. Between states, these interactions
include war, trade, and diplomacy. Non-state actors include intergovernmental organizations, multinational corporations, multilateral financial institutions,
international non-governmental and humanitarian organizations, transnational
diaspora communities, drug cartels, and armed resistance groups. A core assumption of IR is the anarchic nature of the international system - states regulate themselves without a central governing body, or without a “world police."
DAOs similarly face questions about governing in the absence of a pre-existing
central governing body.
With cross-chain interoperability protocols such as Layer Zero or IBC enabling interactions between chains, can we think of chains functioning as selfgoverning, decentralized platforms themselves, connected by bridges? What
determines coalition formation in these ecosystems, and what is the role of
inter-chain, or inter-DAO governance? Could lessons from global governance be
applied here? Just as the League of Nations was formed to hold nation-states accountable,and for example regional trade commissions, global health bodies, or
the international criminal court were designed to pool expert knowledge and enforce common norms, DAOs also grapple with balancing expert knowledge and
centralized accountability with individual autonomy and representation. An interesting framework might connect parallels between interactions of states and
non-state actors in the international system, with interactions between DAOs
53

and L1 and L2 protocols, forming alliances and coalitions, and facing similar
questions about balancing the desire for expert knowledge and centralized accountability with the desire for autonomy and representation.
Moreover, scholars have argued that globalization and the proliferation of
non-state actors in recent decades has led to the erosion of power and sovereignty
of the traditional Westphalian nation state (Keck and Sikkink, 1998). While
some early IR scholarship focuses on the use-case of cross-border payments via
cryptocurrencies [205, 76], many open questions remain about how DAOs - and
the underlying blockchain tech more broadly - might reshape how we think
about cooperation, governance, and power in the international system.
The above paragraphs highlight fruitful avenues for connecting research on
DAO governance to existing scholarship on formal, informal, or global governance. In addition to both theoretical and empirical advances scholarship on
governance, political institutions, and civic behavior, studying DAOs offers an
additional important output: Understanding DAO governance could also potentially inform the design of new digital processes for online civic engagement and
assembly. While other aspects of society have rapidly digitized, political institutions continue to employ processes designed for pre-digital times. The reason for
holding national political leaders accountable only every 2-4 years, for example,
is essentially a technology problem and there is arguably little reason to believe
existing systems for representation, accountability, civic participation, or even
the organization of nation states under the current Westphalian system will be
immune to digital disruption [37, 255]. Studying DAO governance offers the
opportunity for scholars to combine centuries of political thought with lessons
from the trial and error of early web3 collectives to build democratic political
institutions for the future.

7.6

Political philosophy

Summary: DAOs present far-reaching questions related to deliberation, justice,
access, fairness, representation, and self-determination in digital governance,
necessitating productive dialogue between political philosophers and DAO members to bridge the gap between traditional and techno-normative concepts. Applying lessons from political philosophy will offer insights into the complexities
of the digital public sphere, civic foundations of discourse, and legitimacy in
group action.
Concepts, methodologies, and frameworks from political philosophy also
speak to contemporary issues raised by the presence of DAOs in digital governance infrastructures. Though to date political theorists have shown little
interest in DAO-based governance, DAOs clearly raise questions on the nature
of deliberation in the digital public sphere, justice, access to information, fairness
and political equality, representation and participation, and self-determination.
The most important immediate work will need to be translational, such
that political philosophers and DAO members can speak to each other productively. Currently, political theorists speak in highly technical terminology inherited from a long tradition of normative and analytical thinking, whereas DAO
54

builders and members may describe their work using inventive lexicons native to
the blockchain space. A significant contribution to the literature on DAOs would
translate between traditional concepts in political philosophy (such as equality,
liberty, non-domination, and reciprocity), and what some have called “technonormative concepts," cited as desirable by builders and community members
[12]. This parallels early work on AI ethics and on bioethics.
As an operative medium for social organization and coordination, DAOs
raise questions around the emerging role of the digital public sphere. Research
in this area might examine recent experiments in efforts in more healthy, democratic digital conversations and decision making, such as Polis. Importantly,
it’s worth considering whether this “democratization" of digital conversations
is having a collectivizing effect rather than simply empowering atomized individuals. Research here might also turn to Jürgen Habermas’s formulation of
the public sphere [132] and recent work looking at Habermasian approaches to
digital technologies and the digital possibilities (and perils) of healthy, deliberative democracy. Further research in political thought on DAOs might ask
whether traditional models of deliberative democracy suffice in capturing the
complexities of the digital public sphere and whether DAOs offer new technological means to empower individuals to collaborate as political, economic, and
social equals as members of collective decision-making bodies.
Among the key concerns of contemporary and 20th century political philosophy, riding on the coattails of the Rawlsian tradition in A Theory of Justice
[224], are questions of distributive justice. These concern the fair distribution
of benefits and burdens of social cooperation and mutual reciprocity in a society of individuals with competing needs and claims. Building on Ciepley’s
work on political theorizing about corporations [78], DAOs cannot be satisfactorily assimilated to the dichotomous categories that form the basis for liberal
political theorizing, such as public/private, government/market, state/society,
privilege/equality, and status/contract. DAOs may require political theorists to
carve out a new set of rules and norms of regulation that address “meso-level"
institutions. First off, can we even apply existing theories of distributive justice
to questions of DAO governance? If so, what counts as a distributive good in
DAOs (e.g. tokens as financial compensation or reputational markers, social
bases for self-respect) and according to what criterion of justice should these
goods be distributed (e.g. equality, desert, market forces)? There also arises
the question of global territorial scope [65, 207, 258] and of justice in production or “productive justice" [256]. Can DAO members be compelled to work to
produce primary goods whose principles of distributive justice, if any, governs
to be produced? What principles should govern the production of such goods in
DAOs and to what degree ought such principles incur obligations (of work) on
DAO members? What are the conditions of DAO membership as an analogue
of citizenship?
Provided that members of a DAO span various cross-cultural identities that
include a plurality of geographies, citizenships, and political affiliations, questions arise on the civic foundations of discourse across boundaries of difference.
Some scholars cite the importance of egalitarian pluralism as a starting ground
55

[12, 147]. We must ask questions about how DAOs raise both opportunities for
individuals to act as decision-making equals in political and economic forums.
Perhaps, we must challenge the presumption that token-based participation in
DAOs, even in theory, can offer robust conditions of political equality such as
those demanded by Danielle Allen’s recent interpretation and critique of Rawls
(Allen, 2023).
Another potentially fruitful area for research in political philosophy centers
around questions of legitimacy and group action. DAOs provide a unique crossnational medium for the technological constitution of groups. Recent work in
political philosophy has suggested that democratic legitimacy is not simply a
descriptive, positivistic notion, but is deeply normative [16, 174]. Much of this
work centers around questions about the possibility and definition of group
actors and group agency. Philosophers might seek to define more formally the
conditions under which decision-making in and by DAOs can be legitimate.
Even further, philosophers might study DAOs as potentially novel structures
for collective decision-making which shed light on traditional work on group
agents.

Acknowledgements
We are deeply grateful for suggestions, comments, and feedback from Helena
Rong, Scott Moore, Divya Siddarth, Anna Weichselbraun, Eugene Leventhal,
Hélène Landemore, Tony Douglas, Connor Spelliscy, Sara Horowitz, Dawn Song,
Nathan Schneider, Daniel Kronovet, Marina Markezic, Dennison Bertram, Cent
Hosten, and Hazel Devjani.

References
[1] DeepDAO. Accessed October 26, 2022.
[2] Snapshot. Accessed October 27, 2023.
[3] Select Committee on Australia as a Technology and Financial Centre, Oct.
2021.
[4] Wyoming Decentralized Autonomous Organization Supplement, Apr.
2021.
[5] DAOstar, Mar. 2023. Accessed March 31, 2023.
[6] PR008 – DAO Regulation., Mar. 2023.
[7] J. Abadi and M. Brunnermeier. Blockchain Economics, Dec. 2018.
[8] S. Abar, G. K. Theodoropoulos, P. Lemarinier, and G. M. P. O’Hare.
Agent Based Modelling and Simulation tools: A review of the state-of-art
software. Computer Science Review, 24:13–33, May 2017.
56

[9] C. Abidin and G. de Seta. Private messages from the field: Confessions
on digital ethnography and its discomforts. Journal of Digital Social Research, 2020.
[10] H. Al-Breiki, M. H. U. Rehman, K. Salah, and D. Svetinovic. Trustworthy
Blockchain Oracles: Review, Comparison, and Open Research Challenges.
IEEE Access, 8:85675–85685, 2020. Conference Name: IEEE Access.
[11] A. A. Alchian. Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic Theory. Journal of
Political Economy, 58(3):211–221, June 1950. Publisher: The University
of Chicago Press.
[12] D. Allen, G. Weyl, D. Siddarth, J. Simons, and W. Lim. Ethics of Decentralized Social Technologies: Lessons from Web3, the Fediverse, and
Beyond. Technical report, Harvard University or the Justice, Health &
Democracy Impact Initiative, Mar. 2023.
[13] D. W. Allen, C. Berg, and A. Lane. Cryptodemocracy: How Blockchain
Can Radically Expand Democratic Choice. 2019.
[14] M. Althoff. Reachability analysis and its application to the safety assessment of autonomous cars. Doctoral Dissertation, Technische Universität
München, 2010.
[15] M. Alvesson and D. Kärreman. Taking the Linguistic Turn in Organizational Research: Challenges, Responses, Consequences. The Journal of
Applied Behavioral Science, 36(2):136–158, June 2000. Publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc.
[16] A. I. Applbaum. Legitimacy without the Duty to Obey. Philosophy &
Public Affairs, 38(3):215–239, 2010.
[17] Aristotle. Nicomachean Ethics. 353 BCE.
[18] J. Arroyo, D. Davó, E. Martínez-Vicente, Y. Faqir-Rhazoui, and S. Hassan. DAO-Analyzer: Exploring Activity and Participation in Blockchain
Organizations. In Companion Publication of the 2022 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, CSCW’22 Companion, pages 193–196, New York, NY, USA, Nov. 2022. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[19] F. Ast and B. Deffains.
When Online Dispute Resolution Meets
Blockchain: The Birth of Decentralized Justice. Stanford Journal of
Blockchain Law & Policy, June 2021.
[20] P. Atkinson and M. Hammersley. Ethnography and participant observation. In Strategies of Qualitative Inquiry, pages 248–261. Thousand Oaks:
Sage., 1998.

57

[21] J. Austgen, A. Fábrega, S. Allen, K. Babel, M. Kelkar, and A. Juels. DAO
Decentralization: Voting-Bloc Entropy, Bribery, and Dark DAOs. 2023.
[22] G. Avner. Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons
from Medieval Trade. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[23] K. Baldwin. The Paradox of Traditional Chiefs in Democratic Africa.
Cambridge University Press, 1 edition, Nov. 2015.
[24] A. Baliga, I. Subhod, P. Kamat, and S. Chatterjee. Performance Evaluation of the Quorum Blockchain Platform. ArXiv, July 2018.
[25] J. Bannermanquist. Marshall Islands legally recognizes DAOs as domestic
limited liability companies, Dec. 2022.
[26] C. Baum, J. Chiang, B. David, and T. Frederiksen. Eagle: Efficient Privacy Preserving Smart Contracts. 2022.
[27] J. A. C. Baum and P. Ingram. Survival-Enhancing Learning in the Manhattan Hotel Industry, 1898–1980. Management Science, 44(7):996–1016,
July 1998.
[28] T. Beauchamp and J. F. Childress. Principles of biomedical ethics (6th
ed.). New York: Oxford University Press., 2009.
[29] R. Becker, G. D’Angelo, E. Delfaraz, and H. Gilbert. Unveiling the
Truth in Liquid Democracy with Misinformed Voters. In D. Fotakis and
D. Ríos Insua, editors, Algorithmic Decision Theory, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 132–146, Cham, 2021. Springer International
Publishing.
[30] E. D. Beinhocker. The Origin of Wealth: The Radical Remaking of Economics and What it Means for Business and Society. Harvard Business
Press, Sept. 2007. Google-Books-ID: GtRBDwAAQBAJ.
[31] R. Belchior, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia. A Survey
on Blockchain Interoperability: Past, Present, and Future Trends. ACM
Computing Surveys, 54(8):168:1–168:41, Oct. 2021.
[32] J. Benaloh, R. Rivest, P. Y. A. Ryan, P. Stark, V. Teague, and P. Vora.
End-to-end verifiability, Apr. 2015. arXiv:1504.03778 [cs].
[33] Y. Benkler, A. Shaw, and M. Benjamin. Peer production: A form of
collective intelligence. Handbook for Collective Intelligence, 175, 2015.
[34] A. Berg and C. Berg. Exit, Voice, and Forking, Dec. 2017.
[35] C. Berg, S. Davidson, and J. Potts. Understanding the Blockchain Economy, 2019.

58

[36] P. L. Berger and T. Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality: A
Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. Open Road Media, Apr. 2011.
Google-Books-ID: Jcma84waN3AC.
[37] L. Bernholz, Helene Landemore, and R. Reich, editors. Digital Technology
and Democratic Theory. The University of Chicago Press, 2021.
[38] K. Bhargavan, A. Delignat-Lavaud, C. Fournet, A. Gollamudi,
G. Gonthier, N. Kobeissi, N. Kulatova, A. Rastogi, T. Sibut-Pinote,
N. Swamy, and S. Zanella-Béguelin. Formal Verification of Smart Contracts: Short Paper. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Workshop on Programming Languages and Analysis for Security, PLAS ’16, pages 91–96,
New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2016. Association for Computing Machinery.
[39] G. Björnsson and K. Hess. Corporate Crocodile Tears? On the Reactive Attitudes of Corporate Agents. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 94(2):273–298, Mar. 2017.
[40] D. Black. On the Rationale of Group Decision-making. Journal of Political
Economy, 56(1):23–34, 1948. Publisher: University of Chicago Press.
[41] A. Blais and A. Dobrzynska. Turnout in electoral democracies. European
Journal of Political Research, 33(2):239–262, Mar. 1998.
[42] BlockScience. Applying Lessons from Constitutional Public Finance to
Token System Design, Nov. 2022.
[43] R. Boder. How DAOs Can Transform the Business World, July 2022.
[44] S. Bowe, A. Chiesa, M. Green, I. Miers, P. Mishra, and H. Wu. ZEXE:
Enabling Decentralized Private Computation. 2020 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), pages 947–964, May 2020.
[45] P. Brey. Ethics of Emerging Technology. In S. Hassan, editor, Methods
for the Ethics of Technology. Rowman and Littlefield International, 2017.
[46] A. Brody and S. Couture. Ideologies and Imaginaries in Blockchain Communities: The Case of Ethereum. Canadian Journal of Communication,
46(3):19–pp, 2021.
[47] M. Brooks. St Helena Government Budget Speech 2022. May 2022.
[48] R. Brown. The Corda Platform : An Introduction. 2018.
[49] C. Brummer and R. Seira. Legal Wrappers and DAOs, May 2022.
[50] C. J. Bryan, G. M. Walton, T. Rogers, and C. S. Dweck. Motivating
voter turnout by invoking the self. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(31):12653–12656, Aug.
2011.

59

[51] J. M. Buchanan. The domain of constitutional economics. Constitutional
Political Economy, 1(1):1–18, Dec. 1990.
[52] J. M. Buchanan and G. Tullock. The Calculus of Consent: Logical Foundations of Constitutional Democracy. 1962.
[53] E. Bueno de Mesquita and A. Hall. Paying People to Participate in Governance. a16z Crypto, 2022.
[54] B. Bunz, J. Bootle, D. Boneh, A. Poelstra, P. Wuille, and G. Maxwell.
Bulletproofs: Short Proofs for Confidential Transactions and More. 2018
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 315–334, May
2018.
[55] R. M. Burton, D. D. Håkonsson, J. Nickerson, P. Puranam,
M. Workiewicz, and T. Zenger. GitHub: exploring the space between
boss-less and hierarchical forms of organizing. Journal of Organization
Design, 6(1):10, Dec. 2017.
[56] V. Buterin. DAOs, DACs, DAs and More: An Incomplete Terminology
Guide, June 2014.
[57] V. Buterin. Minimal anti-collusion infrastructure, May 2019.
[58] V. Buterin. Credible Neutrality As A Guiding Principle, Jan. 2020.
[59] V. Buterin. The Most Important Scarce Resource is Legitimacy, Mar.
2021.
[60] V. Buterin. On Nathan Schneider on the limits of cryptoeconomics, Sept.
2021.
[61] V. Buterin. What do I think about Community Notes?, Aug. 2023.
[62] V. Buterin, E. Conner, R. Dudley, M. Slipper, I. Norden, and A. Bakhta.
EIP-1559: Fee market change for ETH 1.0 chain, Apr. 2019.
[63] V. Buterin, Z. Hitzig, and E. G. Weyl. A Flexible Design for Funding Public Goods. Management Science, 65(11):5171–5187, Nov. 2019.
arXiv:1809.06421 [econ, q-fin].
[64] B. Bünz, S. Agrawal, M. Zamani, and D. Boneh. Zether: Towards Privacy
in a Smart Contract World. volume 12059, pages 423–443, Cham, 2020.
Springer International Publishing.
[65] S. Caney. Cosmopolitan Justice, Responsibility, and Global Climate
Change. Leiden Journal of International Law, 18(4):747–775, Dec. 2005.
[66] K. M. Carley. Organizational adaptation in volatile environments. In
D. R. Ilgen and C. L. Hulin, editors, Computational modeling of behavior
in organizations: The third scientific discipline., pages 241–273. American
Psychological Association, Washington, 2000.
60

[67] M. Casson. The Nature of the Firm Reconsidered: Information Synthesis and Entrepreneurial Organisation. MIR: Management International
Review, 36:55–94, 1996.
[68] M. Casson. Information and Organization: A New Perspective on the
Theory of the Firm. Clarendon Press., 1997.
[69] C. Catalini and J. S. Gans. Some simple economics of the blockchain.
Communications of the ACM, 63(7):80–90, June 2020.
[70] O. Cetinkaya and D. Cetinkaya. Verification and Validation Issues in
Electronic Voting. Electronic Journal of e-Government, 5(2):pp117-126–
pp117-126, Dec. 2007. Number: 2.
[71] E. Chamlee-Wright. The Cultural Foundations of Economic Development:
Urban Female Entrepreneurship in Ghana, 2002.
[72] E. Chamlee-Wright. The Structure of Social Capital: An Austrian Perspective on its Nature and Development. Review of Political Economy,
20:41–58, Feb. 2008.
[73] A. D. Chandler. Strategy and Structure. The MIT Press, Aug. 1969.
[74] D. Chaum, A. Essex, R. Carback, J. Clark, S. Popoveniuc, A. Sherman,
and P. Vora. Scantegrity: End-to-End Voter-Verifiable Optical- Scan Voting. IEEE Security & Privacy, 6(3):40–46, May 2008.
[75] R. Cheng, F. Zhang, J. Kos, W. He, N. Hynes, N. Johnson, A. Juels,
A. Miller, and D. Song. Ekiden: A Platform for ConfidentialityPreserving, Trustworthy, and Performant Smart Contracts. 2019 IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), pages 185–
200, June 2019.
[76] H.-k. Chey.
Cryptocurrencies and the IPE of money:
an
agenda for research.
Review of International Political Economy, 30(4):1605–1620, July 2023.
Publisher: Routledge _eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2022.2109188.
[77] I. H.-Y. Chiu and J. Linarelli. Regulating the Crypto Economy: Business
Transformations and Financialisation. Hart Publishing, Oxford ; New
York, Nov. 2021.
[78] D. A. Ciepley. Beyond Public and Private: Toward a Political Theory of
the Corporation, Feb. 2013.
[79] A. E. Clarke. Situational Analyses: Grounded Theory Mapping After the
Postmodern Turn. Symbolic Interaction, 26(4):553–576, Nov. 2003.
[80] A. E. Clarke, R. Washburn, C. Friese, A. E. Clarke, and R. Washburn,
editors. : Mapping Research with Grounded Theory. Routledge, New
York, June 2016.
61

[81] M. R. Clarkson, S. Chong, and A. C. Myers. Civitas: Toward a Secure
Voting System. In 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (sp
2008), pages 354–368, May 2008. ISSN: 2375-1207.
[82] R. H. Coase. The Nature of the Firm. Economica, 4(16):386–405, Nov.
1937.
[83] M. A. Cohen. Punishing Corporations. In M. L. Rorie, editor, The Handbook of White-Collar Crime, pages 314–333. Wiley, 1 edition, Oct. 2019.
[84] M. D. Cohen, J. G. March, and J. P. Olsen. A Garbage Can Model
of Organizational Choice. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(1):1–25,
1972.
[85] U. L. Commission. Decentralised Autonomous Organisations (DAOs) Call for Evidence, Nov. 2022.
[86] L. W. Cong and Z. He. Blockchain Disruption and Smart Contracts. The
Review of Financial Studies, 32(5):1754–1797, May 2019.
[87] K. Conway. Blockchain Technology: Limited Liability Companies and the
Need for North Carolina Legislation. Campbell Law Review, 45(1):127,
Jan. 2022.
[88] S. E. S. Crawford and E. Ostrom. A Grammar of Institutions. American
Political Science Review, 89(3):582–600, Sept. 1995.
[89] C. F. Dagdelen, J. Emmett, M. Hampshire, S. Voshmgir, and M. Zargham.
Exploring DAO2DAO Collaboration Mechanisms, Mar. 2021.
[90] R. A. Dahl. Democracy and Its Critics. Yale University Press, 1989.
Google-Books-ID: l1RQngEACAAJ.
[91] P. Daian, T. Kell, I. Miers, and A. Juels. On-Chain Vote Buying and the
Rise of Dark DAOs, July 2018.
[92] S. Davidson, P. D. Filippi, and J. Potts. Blockchains and the economic
institutions of capitalism. Journal of Institutional Economics, 14(4):639–
658, Aug. 2018. Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
[93] S. Davidson and J. Potts. Corporate Governance in a Crypto-World, May
2022.
[94] P. De Filippi and S. Hassan. Blockchain Technology as a Regulatory Technology: From Code is Law to Law is Code, Jan. 2018. arXiv:1801.02507
[cs].
[95] P. De Filippi, M. Mannan, J. Henderson, T. Merk, S. Cossar, and
K. Nabben. Report on Blockchain Technology & Legitimacy, Dec. 2022.

62

[96] P. De Filippi, M. Mannan, and W. Reijers. The alegality of blockchain
technology. Policy and Society, 41(3):358–372, 2022.
[97] L. DeNardis. Protocol Politics: The Globalization of Internet Governance.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, first edition, 1st printing edition, July
2009.
[98] P. J. DiMaggio and W. W. Powell. The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields.
American Sociological Review, 48(2):147–160, 1983. Publisher: [American
Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc.].
[99] A. Dix, J. E. Finlay, G. D. Abowd, and R. Beale. Human-Computer
Interaction. Pearson, Harlow, England ; New York, 3rd edition edition,
Sept. 2003.
[100] S. Djankov, E. Glaeser, R. LaPorta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer.
The New Comparative Economics. Journal of Comparative Economics,
31(4):595–619, 2003.
[101] B. P. Douglass. Chapter 1 - What Is Model-Based Systems Engineering?
In B. P. Douglass, editor, Agile Systems Engineering, pages 1–39. Morgan
Kaufmann, Boston, Jan. 2016.
[102] J. Driver. Moral Theory. June 2022.
[103] Q. DuPont. Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history and
ethnography of “The DAO,” a failed decentralized autonomous organization. In Bitcoin and Beyond. Routledge, 2017. Num Pages: 21.
[104] N. Eghbal. Working in Public: The Making and Maintenance of Open
Source Software. Stripe Press, 2020. Google-Books-ID: EKeUzQEACAAJ.
[105] C. Elsden, A. Manohar, J. Briggs, M. Harding, C. Speed, and J. Vines.
Making Sense of Blockchain Applications: A Typology for HCI. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’18, pages 1–14, New York, NY, USA, Apr. 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[106] P. C. Evans and A. Gawer. The Rise of the platform Enterprise: A Global
Survey. Technical report, The Center for Global Enterprise, 2016.
[107] E. Ezcurra, P. Ezcurra, and B. Meissner. Ancient inhabitants of the Basin
of Mexico kept an accurate agricultural calendar using sunrise observatories and mountain alignments. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 119(51):e2215615119, Dec. 2022. Publisher: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.
[108] E. F. Fama and K. R. French. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33(1):3–56, Feb. 1993.
63

[109] E. F. Fama and M. C. Jensen. Separation of Ownership and Control. The
Journal of Law & Economics, 26(2):301–325, 1983. Publisher: [University of Chicago Press, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago,
University of Chicago Law School].
[110] J. Fan and A. X. Zhang. Digital Juries: A Civics-Oriented Approach
to Platform Governance. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’20, pages 1–14, New York,
NY, USA, Apr. 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[111] F. Fannizadeh. Lawmakers In New Hampshire And Utah Recognize DAOs
As Legal Persons, July 2023.
[112] J. S. Farmer, J. Cahill, J. S. Farmer, and J. Cahill. DAOs: A game changer
in need of new rules. Reuters, Oct. 2022.
[113] S. Faustino, I. Faria, and R. Marques. The myths and legends of king
Satoshi and the knights of blockchain. Journal of Cultural Economy,
15(1):67–80, Jan. 2022.
[114] R. Feichtinger, R. Fritsch, Y. Vonlanthen, and R. Wattenhofer. The Hidden Shortcomings of (D)AOs – An Empirical Study of On-Chain Governance, Feb. 2023. arXiv:2302.12125 [cs].
[115] R. Finke and R. Stark. The Churching of America, 1776-2005: Winners
and Losers in Our Religious Economy. Rutgers University Press, New
Brunswick, N.J, revised edition edition, Mar. 2005.
[116] C. K. Frantz and S. Siddiki.
Institutional Grammar 2.0:
A specification for encoding and analyzing institutional design.
Public Administration, 99(2):222–247, 2021.
_eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/padm.12719.
[117] S. Frey, J. Hedges, J. Tan, and P. Zahn. Composing games into complex
institutions. PLOS ONE, 18(3):e0283361, Mar. 2023. Publisher: Public
Library of Science.
[118] S. Frey, P. M. Krafft, and B. C. Keegan. "This Place Does What It
Was Built For": Designing Digital Institutions for Participatory Change.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3(CSCW):1–
31, Nov. 2019.
[119] S. Frey and R. W. Sumner. Emergence of integrated institutions in a large
population of self-governing communities. PLOS ONE, 14(7):e0216335,
July 2019.
[120] R. Friedland and R. Alford. Bringing Society Back In: Symbols, Practices,
and Institutional Contradictions. Jan. 1991.

64

[121] M. Ganado, J. Ellul, G. Pace, S. Tendon, and B. Wilson. Mapping the
Future of Legal Personality. MIT Computational Law Report, Nov. 2020.
[122] J. Gandhi. Political Institutions under Dictatorship. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[123] C. Geertz. The Interpretation Of Cultures. Basic Books, 1973. GoogleBooks-ID: m3Y4DgAAQBAJ.
[124] N. Ghani, J. Hedges, V. Winschel, and P. Zahn. Compositional Game
Theory. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on
Logic in Computer Science, LICS ’18, pages 472–481, New York, NY,
USA, July 2018. Association for Computing Machinery.
[125] A. Ghavi, A. Qureshi, G. Weinstein, J. Schwartz, and S. Lofchie. A Primer
on DAOs, Sept. 2022.
[126] A. Gilbert and S. Haig.
Hacker, Feb. 2023.

’Counter-Exploit’ Claws Back $202M From

[127] S. Glaveski. How DAOs Could Change the Way We Work. Harvard
Business Review, Apr. 2022.
[128] I. Goll and A. A. Rasheed. The Relationships between Top Management
Demographic Characteristics, Rational Decision Making, Environmental
Munificence, and Firm Performance. Organization Studies, 26(7):999–
1023, July 2005.
[129] D. P. Green and A. S. Gerber. Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter
Turnout. Brookings Institution Press, 3 edition, 2015.
[130] S. E. Green. A Rhetorical Theory of Diffusion. The Academy of Management Review, 29(4):653–669, 2004. Publisher: Academy of Management.
[131] L. E. Grube and Storr. Culture and Economic Action, 2015.
[132] J. Habermas. The Public Sphere. In Media Studies: A Reader. NYU
Press, Mar. 2000. Google-Books-ID: 86kZKhuAjlAC.
[133] S. Haig. The number of active DAOs is up 660% since 2019. Cointelegraph,
Sept. 2020.
[134] P. A. Hall and R. C. R. Taylor. Political Science and the Three New
Institutionalisms. Political Studies, 1996.
[135] M. T. Hannan, M. D. Burton, and J. N. Baron. Inertia and Change in the
Early Years: Employment Relations in Young, High Technology Firms.
Jan. 1996. Accepted: 2020-11-17T17:23:32Z.
[136] E. Harris-Braun, N. Luck, and A. Brock. Holochain: scalable agent-centric
distributed computing. Oct. 2017.
65

[137] J. K. Hartshorne, J. R. de Leeuw, N. D. Goodman, M. Jennings, and T. J.
O’Donnell. A thousand studies for the price of one: Accelerating psychological science with Pushkin. Behavior Research Methods, 51(4):1782–
1803, Aug. 2019.
[138] S. Hassan and P. De Filippi. Decentralized Autonomous Organization.
Internet Policy Review, 10(2), Apr. 2021.
[139] Hasu and monetsupply. A New Mental Model for Defi Treasuries, Oct.
2021.
[140] F. Hayek. Kinds of Order in Society. New Individualist Review, Vol. 1(No.
3):457–466, 1964.
[141] B. HIGHTON and R. E. WOLFINGER. The Political Implications of
Higher Turnout. British Journal of Political Science, 31(1):179–223, 2001.
[142] C. Hine. Ethnography for the Internet: embedded, embodied and everyday.
Bloomsbury Academic, An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc, London
; New York, 2015.
[143] B. Hitchens and O. Roberts. Decentralised Autonomous Organisations
(DAOs): What are they? And can they be parties to a claim?, Jan. 2023.
[144] S. Hubbard. Beyond the Buzzwords: Web3, DAOs, and the Future of
Human Coordination, Apr. 2022.
[145] N. Ilyushina and T. Macdonald. Decentralised Autonomous Organisations: A New Research Agenda for Labour Economics. The Journal of
The British Blockchain Association, Apr. 2022. Publisher: The British
Blockchain Association.
[146] R. W. Jackman. Political Institutions and Voter Turnout in the Industrial
Democracies. American Political Science Review, 81(2):405–423, 1987.
[147] S. Jain, V. Suriyakumar, K. Creel, and A. Wilson. Algorithmic Pluralism:
A Structural Approach To Equal Opportunity. 2023.
[148] G. Jenkinson. Remote work triggers move to DAOs in the post-pandemic
world: Survey. Cointelegraph, Dec. 2022.
[149] M. Jennings and D. Kerr. How to pick a DAO legal entity, June 2022.
[150] M. C. Jensen and W. H. Meckling. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4):305–360, Oct. 1976.
[151] V. Johnson. What Is Organizational Imprinting? Cultural Entrepreneurship in the Founding of the Paris Opera. American Journal of Sociology,
113(1):97–127, 2007. Publisher: The University of Chicago Press.

66

[152] V. Johnson. Backstage at the Revolution: How the Royal Paris Opera
Survived the End of the Old Regime. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
IL, Feb. 2009.
[153] A. Juels, D. Catalano, and M. Jakobsson. Coercion-resistant electronic
elections. In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM workshop on Privacy in the
electronic society, WPES ’05, pages 61–70, New York, NY, USA, Nov.
2005. Association for Computing Machinery.
[154] H. Kalodner, S. Goldfeder, X. Chen, S. M. Weinberg, and E. W. Felten.
Arbitrum: Scalable, private smart contracts. pages 1353–1370, 2018.
[155] G. Kaptchuk, M. Green, and I. Miers. Giving State to the Stateless:
Augmenting Trustworthy Computation with Ledgers. Proceedings 2019
Network and Distributed System Security Symposium, 2019.
[156] M. Kaptein and M. Constantinescu. Corporations as Moral Entities. In
D. C. Poff and A. C. Michalos, editors, Encyclopedia of Business and
Professional Ethics, pages 1–4. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2017.
[157] Karakostas, Dimitris, Kiayias, Aggelos, and Ovezik, Christina. SoK: A
Stratified Approach to Blockchain Decentralization. ArXiv, 2022.
[158] R. M. Karp. Understanding Science Through the Computational Lens.
Journal of Computer Science and Technology, 26(4):569–577, July 2011.
[159] M. Kelkar, K. Babel, P. Daian, J. Austgen, V. Buterin, and A. Juels.
Complete Knowledge: Preventing Encumbrance of Cryptographic Secrets,
2023. Publication info: Preprint.
[160] T. Kerber, A. Kiayias, and M. Kohlweiss. Kachina - Foundations of Private Smart Contracts. 2021 IEEE 34th Computer Security Foundations
Symposium (CSF), pages 1–16, June 2021.
[161] I. M. Kirzner. Competition and Entrepreneurship. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL, 1973.
[162] J. Koh and Y.-G. Kim. Sense of Virtual Community: A Conceptual
Framework and Empirical Validation. International Journal of Electronic
Commerce, 8(2):75–93, 2003. Publisher: Taylor & Francis, Ltd.
[163] P. Kollock and M. Smith. Managing the Virtual Commons: Cooperation
and conflict in computer communities. Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, Social, and Cross-Cultural Perspectives, edited bySusan
Herring. Amsterdam: John Benjamins., pages Pp. 109–128, Jan. 1996.
[164] L. Korpas and J. Z. Tan. Governance Surfaces of DAOs, 2023.
[165] L. M. Korpas, S. Frey, and J. Tan. Political, economic, and governance
attitudes of blockchain users. Frontiers in Blockchain, 6, 2023.
67

[166] A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen, and C. Papamanthou. Hawk: The
Blockchain Model of Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart Contracts. 2016 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages 839–
858, May 2016.
[167] J. Kostelnik and D. Skarbek. The governance institutions of a drug trafficking organization. Public Choice, 156(1/2):95–103, 2013. Publisher:
Springer.
[168] K. Kreutler. A Prehistory of DAOs, 2021.
[169] J. Kwon and E. Buchman. Cosmos Whitepaper: A Network of Distributed
Ledgers. 2019.
[170] S. P. Lalley and E. G. Weyl. Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism Design
Can Radicalize Democracy. AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108:33–37, May
2018.
[171] H. Landemore. Democratic Reason: Politics, Collective Intelligence, and
the Rule of the Many. Princeton University Press, 2017.
[172] S. Larimer. Bitcoin and the Three Laws of Robotics, Sept. 2013.
[173] B. Latour. Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-networktheory. Oup Oxford, 2007.
[174] S. Lazar. Legitimacy, Authority, and Democratic Duties of Explanation.
2022.
[175] M. LeBar. Corporations, Moral Agency, and Reactive Attitudes. Georgetown Journal of Law & Public Policy, 17:811, 2019.
[176] V. Lehdonvirta and E. Castronova. Virtual Economies: Design and Analysis. The MIT Press, 2014.
[177] M. J. Leiblein and D. J. Miller. An empirical examination of transactionand firm-level influences on the vertical boundaries of the firm. Strategic
Management Journal, 24(9):839–859, Sept. 2003.
[178] C. Li, R. Xu, and L. Duan. Liquid Democracy in DPoS Blockchains, Sept.
2023. arXiv:2309.01090 [cs].
[179] A. Lijphart. Patterns of Democracy: Government Forms and Performance
in Thirty-Six Countries. Yale University Press, 2012.
[180] J. Locke. Two Treatises of Government. 1690.
[181] K. Lorenz. Der Kumpan in der Umwelt des Vogels. Journal für Ornithologie, 83(2):137–213, Apr. 1935.

68

[182] M. Lounsbury and M. A. Glynn.
Cultural entrepreneurship:
stories, legitimacy, and the acquisition of resources.
Strategic Management Journal, 22(6-7):545–564, 2001.
_eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/smj.188.
[183] K. F. K. Low, E. Schuster, and W. Y. Wan. The Company and Blockchain
Technology, Oct. 2022.
[184] F. Lumineau, W. Wang, and O. Schilke. Blockchain Governance—A New
Way of Organizing Collaborations? Organization Science, 32(2):500–521,
Mar. 2021. Publisher: INFORMS.
[185] C. Lustig. Intersecting Imaginaries: Visions of Decentralized Autonomous
Systems. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction,
3(CSCW):210:1–210:27, Nov. 2019.
[186] W. J. Luther. CRYPTOCURRENCIES, NETWORK EFFECTS, AND
SWITCHING COSTS. Contemporary Economic Policy, 34(3):553–571,
July 2016.
[187] A. Maddox. Netnography to Uncover Cryptomarkets. In Netnography
Unlimited. Routledge, 2020.
[188] A. Maddox, M. J. Barratt, M. Allen, and S. Lenton. Constructive activism in the dark web: cryptomarkets and illicit drugs in the digital
‘demimonde’. Information, Communication & Society, 19(1):111–126,
Jan. 2016.
[189] D. Magazzeni, P. McBurney, and W. Nash. Validation and Verification
of Smart Contracts: A Research Agenda. Computer, 50(9):50–57, 2017.
Conference Name: Computer.
[190] W. Magnuson. Blockchain Democracy: Technology, Law and the Rule of
the Crowd. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2020.
[191] M. Mannan. Fostering Worker Cooperatives with Blockchain Technology:
Lessons from the Colony Project, Dec. 2018.
[192] J. G. March, L. S. Sproull, and M. Tamuz. Learning from Samples of One
or Fewer. Organization Science, 2(1):1–13, Feb. 1991.
[193] Messias, Johnnatan, Pahari, Vabuk, Chandrasekaran, Balakrishnan, Guummadi, Krishna P., and Loiseau, Patrick. Understanding Blockchain
Governance: Analyzing Decentralized Voting to Amend DeFi Smart Contracts. ArXiv, 2023.
[194] MetisDAO. New Survey Indicates The Rapid Growth of Decentralized
Organizations is Coming, Dec. 2022.

69

[195] L. Metjahic. Deconstructing the DAO: The need for legal recognition and
the application of securities laws to decentralized organizations. Cardozo
L. Rev., 39:1533, 2017.
[196] R. v. d. Meyden. On the specification and verification of atomic swap
smart contracts (extended abstract). In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), pages 176–179, May
2019.
[197] MIDAO. MIDAO awarded Facilitation of DAO Registry Process by government of Marshall Islands, Dec. 2022.
[198] E. Miu, N. Gulley, K. N. Laland, and L. Rendell. Innovation and cumulative culture through tweaks and leaps in online programming contests.
Nature Communications, 9(1):2321, June 2018. Number: 1 Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group.
[199] Montesquieu. The Spirit of the Laws. Hafner Publishing Company, 1748.
[200] G. Moore. What Is Quadratic Voting and Why Don’t More Projects Use
It?, Jan. 2023.
[201] A. Murray, S. Kuban, M. Josefy, and J. Anderson. Contracting in
the Smart Era: The Implications of Blockchain and Decentralized Autonomous Organizations for Contracting and Corporate Governance. Apr.
2019.
[202] A. Murray, S. Kuban, M. Josefy, and J. Anderson. Contracting in
the Smart Era: The Implications of Blockchain and Decentralized Autonomous Organizations for Contracting and Corporate Governance.
Academy of Management Perspectives, 35(4):622–641, Nov. 2021.
[203] K. Nabben. Is a "Decentralized Autonomous Organization" a Panopticon?: Algorithmic governance as creating and mitigating vulnerabilities in
DAOs. In Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary Workshop on (de) Centralization in the Internet, pages 18–25, Virtual Event Germany, Dec. 2021.
ACM.
[204] K. Nabben. Web3 as ‘self-infrastructuring’: The challenge is how. Big
Data & Society, 10(1):205395172311590, Jan. 2023.
[205] K. Nershi. How Strong are International Standards in Practice? Evidence
from Cryptocurrency Transactions. Under Review, 2020.
[206] C. T. Nguyen.
Transparency is Surveillance.
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 105(2):331–361, 2022.
_eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/phpr.12823.
[207] C. Nine. Global Justice and Territory. OUP Oxford, May 2012. GoogleBooks-ID: VCvFb85XvlsC.
70

[208] D. North. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[209] U. D. of the Treasury. U.S. Treasury Sanctions Notorious Virtual Currency
Mixer Tornado Cash, Aug. 2022.
[210] E. Ostrom. Governing the Commons. Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[211] E. Ostrom. Designing complexity to govern complexity. In Property Rights
and the Environment: Social and Ecological Issues, pages 33–45. World
Bank Publications, 1995. Google-Books-ID: O9iBJ_f7RZ8C.
[212] E. Ostrom. Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems. Nobel Prize in Economics documents, Dec. 2009.
[213] J. Parthemore and B. Whitby. WHAT MAKES ANY AGENT A
MORAL AGENT? REFLECTIONS ON MACHINE CONSCIOUSNESS
AND MORAL AGENCY. International Journal of Machine Consciousness, 05(02):105–129, Dec. 2013.
[214] N. Patel. From a meme to $47 million: ConstitutionDAO, crypto, and
the future of crowdfunding, Dec. 2021.
[215] I. Patka. Exploiting Inattention & Optimism in DAOs, Oct. 2022.
[216] M. Peterson. A Match Made in DeFi: Rari Capital and Fei Protocol
Merge to ‘FeiRari’, Dec. 2021.
[217] S. Pink, H. Horst, J. Postill, L. Hjorth, T. Lewis, and J. Tacchi. Digital
ethnography: Principles and practice. sage, 2015.
[218] Plato. "The Republic" in The Dialogues of Plato translated into English
with Analyses and Introductions by B. Jowett, M.A. in Five Volumes.
Oxford University Press, 3rd edition revised and corrected edition, 1892.
[219] R. F. Pol. Anti-money laundering: The world’s least effective policy experiment? Together, we can fix it. Policy Design and Practice, 3(1):73–94,
Jan. 2020.
[220] J. Potts, D. W. E. Allen, C. Berg, S. Davidson, and T. MacDonald. An
economic theory of blockchain foundations, May 2021.
[221] A. Przeworski. Democracy and Development: Political Institutions and
Well-Being in the World, 1950-1990. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[222] P. Puranam, O. Alexy, and M. Reitzig. What’s “New” About New Forms
of Organizing? Academy of Management Review, 39(2):162–180, Apr.
2014.
[223] R. Putnam. Making Democracy Work. Princeton University Press, 1993.

71

[224] J. Rawls. A Theory of Justice: Original Edition. Harvard University
Press, 1971.
[225] E. Rennie, M. Zargham, J. Tan, L. Miller, J. Abbott, K. Nabben, and
P. De Filippi. Toward a Participatory Digital Ethnography of Blockchain
Governance. Qualitative Inquiry, 28(7):837–847, Sept. 2022.
[226] W. Riker. Federalism: Origin, Operation, Significance. Little, Brown, and
Company, 1964.
[227] D. N. Rockmore, C. Fang, N. J. Foti, T. Ginsburg, and D. C. Krakauer.
The cultural evolution of national constitutions. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 69(3):483–494, 2018.
_eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/asi.23971.
[228] D. Ronfeldt. Tribes, Institutions, Markets, Networks: A Framework
About Societal Evolution. Technical report, RAND Corporation, Jan.
1996.
[229] A. S. Roth. Shared Agency. In E. N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
summer 2017 edition, 2017.
[230] J.-J. Rousseau. The Social Contract. 1762.
[231] D. Rozas, A. Tenorio-Fornés, S. Díaz-Molina, and S. Hassan. When Ostrom Meets Blockchain: Exploring the Potentials of Blockchain for Commons Governance. SAGE Open, 11(1):21582440211002526, Jan. 2021.
Publisher: SAGE Publications.
[232] J. Ruane and A. McAfee. What a DAO Can — and Can’t — Do. Harvard
Business Review, May 2022.
[233] C. Russo. "Fair Launch is a New Way for Founders to Express Themselves:" Gavin McDermott of IDEO CoLab - The Defiant, Oct. 2020.
[234] P. Ryan, D. Bismark, J. Heather, S. Schneider, and Zhe Xia. PrÊt À
Voter: a Voter-Verifiable Voting System. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 4(4):662–673, Dec. 2009.
[235] C. Santana and L. Albareda. Blockchain and the emergence of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs): An integrative model and research agenda. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 182:121806,
Sept. 2022.
[236] M. Schillig. Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) under English Law, Sept. 2022.
[237] N. Schneider. Cryptoeconomics as a Limitation on Governance. 2021.

72

[238] T. Scholz and N. Schneider, editors. Ours to Hack and to Own: The Rise
of Platform Cooperativism, A New Vision for the Future of Work and a
Fairer Internet. OR Books, 2016.
[239] J. A. Schumpeter. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper &
Brothers, first edition edition, 1942.
[240] J. Schwartz. Collective Choice, 2011.
[241] R. W. Scott. Institutions and Organizations. Ideas, Interests and Identities.Paperback: 360 pages Publisher: Sage (1995) Language: English
ISBN: 978-142242224. M@n@gement, 17(2):136–140, 2014.
[242] W. R. Scott and J. W. Meyer. Institutional Environments and Organizations: Structural Complexity and Individualism. SAGE Publications, Inc,
Thousand Oaks, Calif, 1st edition edition, Apr. 1994.
[243] N. Seaver. Algorithms as Culture: Some Tactics for the Ethnography of
Algorithmic Systems. Big Data and Society, 4(2), 2017.
[244] G. Selgin. Bitcoin: Problems and Prospects. Apr. 2022. Publisher: Cato
Institute.
[245] P. M. Senge. The fifth discipline: the art and practice of the learning
organization. Doubleday/Currency, New York, rev. and updated edition,
2006. OCLC: ocm65166960.
[246] M. M. Sharif and F. Ghodoosi. The Ethics of Blockchain in Organizations.
Journal of Business Ethics, 178(4):1009–1025, July 2022.
[247] T. Sharma, Y. Kwon, K. Pongmala, H. Wang, A. Miller, D. Song, and
Y. Wang. Unpacking How Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
(DAOs) Work in Practice, Apr. 2023. arXiv:2304.09822 [cs].
[248] J. Shepherd. Are Corporations Moral Agents? | Practical Ethics, Dec.
2015.
[249] A. Shleifer and R. Vishny. A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal
of Finance, 52(2):737–783, 1997.
[250] T. Shorin, J. Pope, L. Lotti, A. Z. Lewis, and M. Gomez. Uniswap Research Report: Discord, Governance, Community, Aug. 2021.
[251] H. A. Simon. The sciences of the artificial. The MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, third edition [2019 edition] edition, 2019.
[252] D. Skarbek. Governance and Prison Gangs. American Political Science
Review, 2011.

73

[253] C. E. Smith, B. Yu, A. Srivastava, A. Halfaker, L. Terveen, and H. Zhu.
Keeping Community in the Loop: Understanding Wikipedia Stakeholder
Values for Machine Learning-Based Systems. In Proceedings of the 2020
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–14,
Honolulu HI USA, Apr. 2020. ACM.
[254] V. V. Sochat, I. W. Eisenberg, A. Z. Enkavi, J. Li, P. G. Bissett, and
R. A. Poldrack. The Experiment Factory: Standardizing Behavioral Experiments. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 2016.
[255] B. Srinivasan. The Network State: How to Start a New Country. 2022.
[256] L. Stanczyk.
Productive Justice.
40(2):144–164, 2012.

Philosophy and Public Affairs,

[257] S. Steffen, B. Bichsel, M. Gersbach, N. Melchior, P. Tsankov, and
M. Vechev. zkay: Specifying and Enforcing Data Privacy in Smart Contracts. Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security, pages 1759–1776, Nov. 2019.
[258] A. Stilz. Territorial boundaries and history. Politics, Philosophy & Economics, 18(4):374–385, Nov. 2019.
[259] A. L. Stinchcombe. Social structure and organizations. In J. A.C. Baum
and F. Dobbin, editors, Economics Meets Sociology in Strategic Management, volume 17 of Advances in Strategic Management, pages 229–259.
Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Jan. 2000.
[260] V. Storr. Understanding the Culture of Markets, 2013.
[261] M. C. Suchman. Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. The Academy of Management Review, 20:571–610, 1995. Place:
US Publisher: Academy of Management.
[262] J. Suchow, T. Morgan, and T. Griffiths. Dallinger, Aug. 2023.
[263] A. J. Sulkowski. The Tao of Dao: Hardcoding Business Ethics on
Blockchain. Business & Finance Law Review, 3:146, 2019.
[264] X. Sun, X. Chen, C. Stasinakis, and G. Sermpinis. Voter Coalitions and
democracy in Decentralized Finance: Evidence from MakerDAO, June
2023. arXiv:2210.11203 [cs, q-fin].
[265] L. Swartz. Theorizing the 2017 blockchain ICO bubble as a network scam.
New Media & Society, 24(7):1695–1713, July 2022.
[266] C. Tan. Tracing Community Genealogy: How New Communities Emerge
from the Old. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web
and Social Media, 12(1), June 2018. Number: 1.

74

[267] J. Z. Tan, M. Langenkamp, A. Weichselbraun, A. Brody, and L. Korpas.
The Constitutions of Web3. 2022.
[268] J. Z. Tan, I. Patka, I. Gershtein, E. Eithcowich, M. Zargham, and
S. Furter. ERC-4824: Common Interfaces for DAOs [DRAFT]. Ethereum
Improvement Proposals, (4824), Feb. 2022.
[269] N. TeBlunthuis and B. M. Hill. Identifying Competition and Mutualism
between Online Groups. Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 16:993–1004, May 2022.
[270] A. Thurman. ‘Curve Wars’ Heat Up: Emergency DAO Invoked After
‘Clear Governance Attack’. CoinDesk, Nov. 2021. Section: Finance.
[271] L. L. Tsai. Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public
Goods Provision in Rural China. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[272] G. Tsebelis. Veto Players: How Political Institutions Work. Princeton
University Press, 2002.
[273] T. Vaitiekunas. Dialektos: Privacy-preserving Smart Contracts. IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2022.
[274] S. Verba and N. H. Nie. Participation in America: Political Democracy
and Social Equality. University of Chicago Press, 1987.
[275] H. W. Volberda, N. Van Der Weerdt, E. Verwaal, M. Stienstra, and A. J.
Verdu. Contingency Fit, Institutional Fit, and Firm Performance: A
Metafit Approach to Organization–Environment Relationships. Organization Science, 23(4):1040–1054, Aug. 2012.
[276] S. Voshmgir and M. Zargham. Foundations of Cryptoeconomic Systems.
Technical report, Research Institute for Cryptoeconomics, Vienna, 2019.
[277] S. Wang, W. Ding, J. Li, Y. Yuan, L. Ouyang, and F.-Y. Wang. Decentralized Autonomous Organizations: Concept, Model, and Applications.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 6(5):870–878, Oct.
2019.
[278] B. R. Weingast. The Economic Role of Political Institutions: MarketPreserving Federalism and Economic Development. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 1995.
[279] P. H. Werhane. Corporate Moral Agency and the Responsibility to Respect Human Rights in the UN Guiding Principles: Do Corporations Have
Moral Rights? Business and Human Rights Journal, 1(1):5–20, Jan. 2016.
[280] L. White. The Market for Cryptocurrencies. Cato Journal, 35(2):383–402,
2015. Publisher: Cato Journal, Cato Institute.

75

[281] A. Wigderson. Mathematics and Computation: A Theory Revolutionizing
Technology and Science. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, Oct.
2019.
[282] J. Wigginton, M. Janoff, J. Perkins, T. Morrey, S. Burton, J. Volz,
A. Truths, D. Antoni, and S. Heiser. Cooperatives: An Ownership Model
for Digital Networks. Technical report, National Society of Accountants
for Cooperatives, Jan. 2023.
[283] O. E. Williamson. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization, 1975.
[284] C. Woetzel. Secret Network: A Privacy-Preserving Secret Contract &
Decentralized Application Platform. 2022.
[285] G. Wood. Polkadot: Vision for a heterogenous multi-chain framework.
Nov. 2016.
[286] A. Wright and C. P. o. L. a. B. N. C. S. o. Law. The Rise of Decentralized Autonomous Organizations: Opportunities and Challenges. Stanford
Journal of Blockchain Law & Policy, June 2021.
[287] S. A. Wright. Measuring DAO Autonomy: Lessons From Other Autonomous Systems. IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society,
2(1):43–53, Mar. 2021.
[288] T. Xie, J. Zhang, Z. Cheng, F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jia, D. Boneh, and
D. Song. zkBridge: Trustless Cross-chain Bridges Made Practical. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’22, pages 3003–3017, New York, NY, USA,
Nov. 2022. Association for Computing Machinery.
[289] D. Yermack. Corporate Governance and Blockchains*. Review of Finance,
21(1):7–31, Mar. 2017.
[290] M. Zargham and K. Nabben. Aligning ‘Decentralized Autonomous Organization’ to Precedents in Cybernetics, Apr. 2022.
[291] M. Zargham, K. Paruch, and J. Shorish. Economic Games as Estimators. In P. Pardalos, I. Kotsireas, Y. Guo, and W. Knottenbelt, editors,
Mathematical Research for Blockchain Economy, Springer Proceedings in
Business and Economics, pages 125–142, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing.
[292] M. Zargham and J. Shorish. Generalized Dynamical Systems Part I: Foundations. Technical report, Institute for Cryptoeconomics, Interdisciplinary
Research, WU Vienna University of Economics and Business, Vienna,
2022.

76

[293] M. Zargham, J. Shorish, and K. Paruch. From Curved Bonding to Configuration Spaces. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain
and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), pages 1–3, May 2020.
[294] Zhang, Luyao, Ma, Xinshi, and Liu, Yulin. SoK: Blockchain Decentralization. ArXiv, 2023.
[295] Q. Zhong and S. Frey. Institutional similarity drives cultural similarity
among online communities. Scientific Reports, 12(1):18982, Nov. 2022.
[296] Q. Zhong, S. Frey, and M. Hilbert. Quantifying the Selective, Stochastic,
and Complementary Drivers of Institutional Evolution in Online Communities. Entropy, 24(9):1185, Sept. 2022.
[297] T. B. Zilber. Institutionalization as an Interplay between Actions, Meanings, and Actors: The Case of a Rape Crisis Center in Israel. The Academy
of Management Journal, 45(1):234–254, 2002. Publisher: Academy of
Management.
[298] L. G. Zucker. The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence.
American Sociological Review, 42(5):726–743, 1977. Publisher: [American
Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc.].
[299] G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. Pentland. Enigma: Decentralized Computation Platform with Guaranteed Privacy, June 2015. arXiv:1506.03471
[cs].

77


